Once upon a time there was an old woman who had one son. She was poor and frail, so it was the boy who went up to the storehouse to fetch meal for the porridge.

But just as he stepped out onto the storehouse steps with the sack in his arms, the North Wind came blustering across the yard, snatched the sack clean away and whirled the meal up into the sky. His mother stood in the cottage doorway and watched it go.

The boy filled another sack, but out on the steps the North Wind came roaring back and took that too. The third time, he had a good look out of the door first. Not a blade of grass was stirring. But he hadn’t got both feet on the steps before the meal was gone again.

Now the boy was indignant. It wasn’t reasonable, he thought, for the North Wind to carry on like that. He would go to the North Wind himself and demand his meal back.

The road was long, and he walked and he walked, but at last he came to the North Wind’s house, far in the north, where every tree leans south.

“Good day,” said the boy, “and thank you for your last visit.”

“Good day,” said the North Wind, who had a gruff, gusty sort of voice. “And thank you for having me. What do you want?”

“Well,” said the boy, “would you be so good as to give me back the meal you took from me on the storehouse steps? We have little enough as it is, and if you snatch away what bit we’ve got, we’ll starve.”

“I haven’t got any meal,” said the North Wind. That was true enough; by now it was scattered to the four winds. “But since you’re so badly off, you shall have a cloth that gives you anything you wish for, if you only say: ‘Cloth, spread yourself and serve up every kind of delicious dish!’”

The boy was well pleased with that.

But the road home was so long that he couldn’t get there in a day, so he stopped for the night at an inn. When the guests sat down to supper, he laid his cloth on a table in the corner and said:

“Cloth, spread yourself and serve up every kind of delicious dish!”

And the cloth did just that. There was pork with crackling, fried trout and new bread, and in the middle of it all a bowl of cream porridge with a pool of butter as big as a millpond. Everyone thought it a marvellous thing, but nobody liked it better than the innkeeper’s wife. At a table like that, she thought, there’d be no roasting and boiling, no laying and setting, no fetching and carrying.

The boy ate until he fell asleep on the bench beside the table. Late in the night, by the glow of the embers, the innkeeper’s wife crept over, lifted his cloth off the table and laid another in its place. It looked exactly the same, but it couldn’t serve up so much as an oatcake.

In the morning the boy took his cloth and went home to his mother.

“I’ve been to see the North Wind,” he said. “He’s a decent sort, for he gave me this cloth. All I have to say is ‘Cloth, spread yourself and serve up every kind of delicious dish!’ and I get all the food I could ever want.”

“Oh yes, I’m sure,” said his mother. “But I’ll believe it when I see it.”

The boy hurried to spread the cloth over the table. “Cloth, spread yourself and serve up every kind of delicious dish!”

But the cloth didn’t serve up so much as a crust of flatbread.

“So I see,” said his mother.

“Then there’s nothing for it but to go back to the North Wind,” said the boy, and off he went.

Late in the afternoon he came to the North Wind’s house.

“Good evening,” said the boy.

“Good evening,” said the North Wind.

“I want payment for that meal,” said the boy. “The cloth you gave me wasn’t much use.”

“I haven’t got any meal,” said the North Wind. “But here’s a billy-goat that makes gold ducats. All you need say is: ‘My goat, make money!’”

The boy liked the sound of that. But he couldn’t get home that day either, so he put up at the inn again. Before he asked for anything, he tried out the goat, to see whether the North Wind had told the truth.

“My goat, make money!” he said.

Out came the gold ducats, ringing and tumbling onto the floor, until they lay in a shining heap under the goat’s beard. The innkeeper watched from the doorway, and he thought that was a very fine goat indeed. So when the boy had fallen asleep, he fetched another goat from the shed, one that most certainly did not make gold ducats, and put it in its place.

Next morning the boy went home.

“The North Wind’s a kind man after all,” he told his mother. “This time he’s given me a goat that makes gold ducats. I only have to say, ‘My goat, make money!’”

“Oh yes, I’m sure,” said his mother. “That’s nothing but talk, and I’ll believe it when I see it.”

The boy stood beside the goat and held out his hand. “My goat, make money!”

But what the goat made wasn’t money.

So back he went to the North Wind. The goat was no good, he said, and he still wanted payment for his meal.

“Well, I’ve nothing left to give you but that old stick in the corner,” said the North Wind. “But it’s the kind of stick that if you say ‘My stick, lay on!’ it lays on, and it won’t stop till you say ‘My stick, stand still!’”

The road was long, so that evening, too, the boy went to the inn. But by now he had worked out what had become of the cloth and the goat. So he lay straight down on the bench and began to snore, pretending to be asleep.

The innkeeper had worked out that the stick must be good for something too. He hunted up one that looked just like it, and when he heard the boy snoring, he crept over to make the swap. But just as he reached for the stick, the boy shouted:

“My stick, lay on!”

The stick flew at the innkeeper and gave him such a drubbing that he leapt over tables and benches with his arms over his head, howling and yelling:

“Oh Lord! Oh Lord! Call off your stick, or it’ll beat me to death! You shall have your cloth and your goat back!”

He ran for them with the stick drumming on his back all the way. He threw the cloth down on the floor, dragged the goat in from the shed, and still the stick kept at him. The boy tied a cord round the goat’s horns, held on to it and watched.

When he thought the innkeeper had had enough, he said, “My stick, stand still!”

Then he put the cloth in his pocket, took the stick in his hand, and led the goat home.

That was fair payment for the meal!