filled with splendor and fine clothes, and then they held a wedding, and thus little Aase the Goose Girl got the prince of England, simply because she was destined to have him.

The Boy and the Devil.

Once upon a time, there was a boy walking along a road cracking nuts; he found a worm-eaten one, and at that moment, he encountered the Devil.

“Is it true,” said the boy, “what they say, that the Devil can make himself so small he can squeeze through the eye of a needle?”

“Yes!” replied the Devil.

“Well, let me see it. Crawl into this nut!” said the boy, and the Devil did.

Once the Devil had crawled in through the wormhole, the boy stuck a stick in it. “Now I've got you,” he said, and he put the nut in his pocket.

After walking a while, he came to a smithy; he went in and asked the blacksmith if he could crack the nut for him.

“Yes, that can be easily done,” replied the blacksmith, and he took his smallest hammer, placed the nut on the anvil, and struck it; but it would not break. Then he took a slightly larger hammer, but it was also not heavy enough; so he took an even bigger one, but that wouldn’t do either; growing angry, the blacksmith took the sledgehammer. “I'll surely break you now,” he said and hit with all his might; and then the nut shattered, so much so that half the smithy roof flew off, and it boomed as if the shop would collapse.

“I think the Devil was in that nut,” said the blacksmith.

“Yes, he was,” replied the boy.

The Seven Foals.

Once upon a time, there was a poor couple; they lived in a shabby hut deep in the forest, living hand to mouth with hardly enough at that; but they had three sons, and the youngest was Askeladden, for he did nothing but lie and dig in the ashes.

One day, the eldest son said he wanted to go out and find work; he was given permission at once, and so he set off into the world. He walked all day, and as evening approached, he came to a king's estate; the king was standing outside on the steps and asked where he was headed.

“Oh, I'm just out looking for work, sir,” said the boy.

“Do you want to work for me and tend to my seven foals?” asked the king.