She didn't care about what the birds sang, but took the reddest one which glowed the most. Then she took to the road and went home, and she got to go in peace and quiet; no one chased after her. When she got home, there was great joy from her mother, and they went straight into the main room and placed the chest there, believing it was filled with nothing but gold and silver. They imagined that both the walls and the roof would be gilded; but when they opened the chest, only snakes and toads spilled out, and whenever the old woman's daughter opened her mouth, it was the same: snakes and toads and all sorts of vermin imaginable came out until it was impossible to live in the house with her. This was the reward she received for serving the troll hag.

The Rooster and the Hen in the Nut Forest.

Once, the rooster and the hen went into the nut forest to collect nuts; but then the hen got a nutshell stuck in its throat and thrashed about with its wings. The rooster had to fetch water for her; he came to the spring and said: “Dear, my spring, give me water; water I will give my hen, my dear hen, which lies dying in the nut forest.” The spring replied, “You won't get water from me until I get leaves from you.” So, the rooster ran to the lime tree: “Dear, my lime tree, give me leaves; leaves I will give to the spring, the spring will give me water, and water I will give my hen, which lies dying in the nut forest.” “You won't get leaves from me until I get red gold ribbons from you,” answered the lime tree. So, the rooster ran to the Virgin Mary: “Dear, my Virgin Mary, give me red gold ribbons; red gold ribbons I will give to the lime tree, the lime tree will give me leaves, leaves I will give to the spring, the spring will give me water, and water I will give my hen, which lies dying in the nut forest.” “You won't get red gold ribbons from me until I get shoes from you,” replied the Virgin Mary. So, the rooster ran to the cobbler: “Dear, my cobbler, give me shoes; shoes I will give to the Virgin Mary, the Virgin Mary will give me red gold ribbons, red gold ribbons I will give to the lime tree, the lime tree will give me leaves, leaves I will give to the spring, the spring will give me water, and water I will give my hen, which lies dying in the nut forest.” “You won't get shoes from me until I get bristles from you,” replied the cobbler. So, the rooster ran to the sow: “Dear, my sow, give me bristles; bristles I will give to the cobbler, the cobbler will give me shoes, shoes I will give to the Virgin Mary, the Virgin Mary will give me red gold ribbons, red gold ribbons I will give to the lime tree, the lime tree will give me leaves, leaves I will give to the spring, the spring will give me water, and water I will give my hen, which lies dying in the nut forest.” “You won't get bristles from me until I get grain from you,” replied the sow. So, the rooster ran to the carpenter: “Dear, my carpenter, give me grain; grain I will give to the sow, the sow will give me bristles, bristles I will give to the cobbler, the cobbler will give me shoes, shoes I will give to the Virgin Mary, the Virgin Mary will give me red gold ribbons, red gold ribbons I will give to the lime tree, the lime tree will give me leaves, leaves I will give to the spring, the spring will give me water, and water I will give my hen, which lies dying in the nut forest.” “You won't get grain from me until I get flatbreads from you,” replied the carpenter. So, the rooster ran to the bakewoman: “Dear, my bakewoman, give me flatbreads; flatbreads I will give to the carpenter, the carpenter will give me grain, grain I will give to the sow, the sow will give me bristles, bristles I will give to the cobbler, the cobbler will give me shoes, shoes I will give to the Virgin Mary, the Virgin Mary will give me red gold ribbons, red gold ribbons I will give to the lime tree, the lime tree will give me leaves, leaves I will give to the spring, the spring will give me water, and water I will give my hen, which lies dying in the nut forest.” “You won't get flatbreads from me until I get firewood from you,” replied the bakewoman. So, the rooster ran to the woodcutter: “Dear, my woodcutter, give me firewood; firewood I will give to the bakewoman, the bakewoman will give me flatbreads, flatbreads I will give to the carpenter, the carpenter will give me grain, grain I will give to the sow, the sow will give me bristles, bristles I will give to the cobbler, the cobbler will give me shoes, shoes I will give to the Virgin Mary, the Virgin Mary will give me red gold ribbons, red gold ribbons I will give to the lime tree, the lime tree will give me leaves, leaves I will give to the spring, the spring will give me water, and water I will give my hen, which lies dying in the nut forest.” “You won't get firewood from me until I get an axe from you,” replied the woodcutter. So, the rooster ran to the smith: “Dear, my smith, give me an axe; an axe I will give to the woodcutter, the woodcutter will give me firewood, firewood I will give to the bakewoman, the bakewoman will give me flatbreads, flatbreads I will give to the carpenter, the carpenter will give me grain, grain I will give to the sow, the sow will give me bristles, bristles I will give to the cobbler, the cobbler will give me shoes, shoes I will give to the Virgin Mary, the Virgin Mary will give me red gold ribbons, red gold ribbons I will give to the lime tree, the lime tree will give me leaves, leaves I will give to the spring, the spring will give me water, and water I will give my hen, which lies dying in the nut forest.” “You won't get an axe from me until I get coal from you,” replied the smith. So, the rooster ran to the charcoal burner: “Dear, my charcoal burner, give me coal; coal I will give to the smith, the smith will give me an axe, an axe I will give to the woodcutter, the woodcutter will give me firewood, firewood I will give to the bakewoman, the bakewoman will give me flatbreads, flatbreads I will give to the carpenter, the carpenter will give me grain, grain I will give to the sow, the sow will give me bristles, bristles I will give to the cobbler, the cobbler will give me shoes, shoes I will give to the Virgin Mary, the Virgin Mary will give me red gold ribbons, red gold ribbons I will give to the lime tree, the lime tree will give me leaves, leaves I will give to the spring, the spring will give me water, and water I will give my hen, which lies dying in the nut forest.” The charcoal burner took pity on the rooster and gave him coal. So, the smith got coal, the woodcutter got an axe, the bakewoman got firewood, the carpenter got flatbreads, the sow got grain, the cobbler got bristles, the Virgin Mary got shoes, the lime tree got red gold ribbons, the spring got leaves, and the rooster got water, which he gave to his dear hen, lying there in the nut forest, and soon she was well again.