Little Shorty

Once upon a time there was a poor couple. They lived in a miserable little cabin, with nothing but black hardship all around them, so they scarcely had anything to eat or anything to keep them warm. But while they had almost none of life’s comforts, they did receive one blessing from God: they had many children. Each year brought them one more. And now they were expecting yet another. The husband was not at all pleased about this; he went around grumbling and complaining, saying that one of God’s gifts like that was quite enough for him. When the time came for his wife to give birth, he went to the forest for firewood, for he did not want to see this new little crybaby. “I’ll hear him soon enough when he starts bawling for food,” he said.

Once the husband was gone, the wife gave birth to a beautiful baby boy. The moment he arrived in the world, he looked around the room.  
“Oh, dear Mother,” he said, “give me some old clothes from my brothers and a couple days’ worth of packed lunch, and I’ll go out into the world and seek my fortune. You have enough children already, from what I can tell.”  
“Heavens help me, my son,” said his mother, “you’re far too little yet; that’ll never do.”  
But the boy held to his plan and begged and pleaded so long that his mother had to give him some old rags and a bit of food tied in a bundle, and so he set off, cheerful and confident, into the world.

He had scarcely gone when the woman gave birth to yet another boy. He also looked around and said, “Oh, dear Mother, give me some old clothes that once belonged to my brothers and a couple days’ worth of packed lunch, so I may go into the world and find my twin brother. You still have enough children anyway.”  
“Heavens help me, you’re far too little, poor thing,” said his mother. “That will never do.”  
But that did not help; this boy too begged and pleaded until he got himself some old rags and a bundle with food, and then he set off, quite boldly, into the world to find his twin brother. After walking a while, the youngest saw his brother off in the distance. He called out to him and asked him to stop: “Wait,” he said, “you’re charging ahead as though you’d been paid to hurry—but you should have waited for your little brother as well, before wandering out into the world.” The older brother stopped and looked back. Once the younger one caught up and explained how it came to be that he was also the woman’s son, he went on: “But now let’s sit down and see what Mother has packed for us to eat.” So that is what they did.

After they had walked for a bit, they came to a brook that ran through a green meadow. There, the younger brother said they really ought to give each other names. “Since we had to hurry off so fast that we got no chance to do it back home, let’s do it here,” he said.  
“What do you want to be called?” asked the older one.  
“I will be called Little Shorty,” the other replied. “And you? What would you like to be called?”  
“I will be called King Lavring,” answered the older.

So they christened each other and carried on walking. After a while, they reached a crossroad, and there they decided to part ways, each taking a different path. They did so, but they had scarcely gone a short distance before they ran into each other again. They separated once more, each taking a different way, but in only a short while the same thing happened—they met again before they knew it. And so it happened a third time, too. Finally, they agreed that one should head east, the other west.  
“But if you ever truly are in dire trouble and danger,” said the older brother, “shout for me three times, and I’ll come to help you. But don’t shout for me until you are in your greatest need!”  
“Well, it won’t be too soon that we see each other again, I suppose,” said Little Shorty.  

Then they said their farewells. Little Shorty went east, and King Lavring went west.

Little Shorty walked alone for quite a while. He then met a very, very old hunchbacked woman who had only one eye. Little Shorty pinched that eye shut (so she couldn’t see).  
“Ow, ow!” cried the old woman. “Where did my eye go?”  
“What will you give me if I let you have your eye back?” asked Little Shorty.  
“I will give you a sword so powerful it can defeat an entire army, no matter how large,” answered the woman.  
“Very well, hand it over,” said Little Shorty.  

The woman gave him the sword, and then she got her eye back.

Little Shorty walked on. After a while, he again met a very, very old hunchbacked woman who had only one eye; he snatched that eye, too, before she noticed.  
“Ow, ow! Where did my eye go?” cried the old woman.  
“What will you give me if I let you have your eye back?” asked Little Shorty.  
“I’ll give you a boat that can travel freshwater and saltwater, over mountains and through deep valleys,” replied the woman.  
“All right, give it to me,” said Little Shorty.

The woman handed him a tiny little boat, so small he could tuck it into his pocket. Then she got her eye back, and they went their separate ways.

After he had walked for a long while, he met for the third time an extremely old hunchbacked woman who had only one eye. Little Shorty snatched that eye again, and when she screamed and complained, asking what had become of her eye, Little Shorty said:  
“What will you give me if I let you have your eye back?”  
“I’ll give you the skill to brew one hundred barrels of malt in a single batch,” said the old woman.  

That skill she gave him, and in return she got her eye back. Then they went their separate ways.

As Little Shorty went on a short distance, he thought it might be fun to try out the boat. So he took it out of his pocket and placed one foot in it, then the other. No sooner had he stepped in with one foot than the boat grew much larger, and when he stepped in with the other, it became as big as sea-going vessels. Little Shorty commanded: “Go forth over freshwater and saltwater, mountains and deep valleys, and do not stop until you reach the King’s palace!” Immediately, the boat shot away as swift as a bird in the air, until it came to a stop a little below the King’s palace.  

At the palace windows, they had watched Little Shorty come sailing along, and they were so astonished that they rushed out to see what sort of person could be flying in a boat. But by the time they came down from the palace, Little Shorty had already gotten out of his boat and tucked it back into his pocket, for as soon as he stepped out of it, it shrank again to the little size it had been when the old woman gave it to him. From the viewpoint of those at the palace, there was nothing to see but a ragged little boy standing down by the shore. The King asked where he was from, but all the boy could say was he did not know, nor did he know how he had ended up there; but he very politely begged for a chance to work in the palace. If there was no other job for him, he could carry firewood and water for the kitchen maid, he said. And that, indeed, he was allowed to do.

When Little Shorty entered the King’s palace, he noticed everything there—inside and out, the walls and the roof—was all draped in black. He asked the kitchen maid what that was supposed to mean.  
“Well, I can tell you that,” she said. “The Princess has for a long time been promised to three trolls, and next Thursday night the first one will come to claim her. Sir Red has said he will do his best to rescue her, but who truly knows if he can. You can imagine, then, how sad everyone is around here.”

When Thursday came, Sir Red accompanied the Princess down to the shore—she had to meet the troll there—and he was supposed to stand guard and protect her. Yet I dare say he did not do the troll much harm. No sooner had the Princess sat upon the shore than Sir Red scrambled up into a big tree growing there and hid himself as best he could in the branches. The Princess wept and begged him not to leave her, but Sir Red paid no attention at all. “It’s better for one to lose their life than two,” Sir Red said.

Meanwhile, Little Shorty pleaded so sweetly with the kitchen maid to let him stroll down to the shore for a short while.  
“Oh, what business have you there?” the maid asked. “You don’t have anything to do down there.”  
“Oh, please,” said Little Shorty, “let me go. I’d just like to play a bit with the other lads down there.”  
“Fine, off you go,” said the maid, “but I want you back before it’s time to hang the evening pot and get the roast on the spit. And bring along a good bundle of firewood when you come back.”  

Little Shorty promised and ran down to the shore.  

No sooner had he reached the spot where the Princess waited than the troll came roaring and crashing in, so huge and massive it was frightening. It had five heads.  
“Fire!” the troll bellowed.  
“Fire yourself!” said Little Shorty.  
“Can you fight?” roared the troll.  
“If I can’t, I can certainly learn,” said Little Shorty.  

The troll swung at him with a thick iron bar clutched in its claw, sending earth flying five yards into the air.  
“Pah!” said Little Shorty. “That was something, indeed! Now let me show you one of my swings!”  

He seized the sword he had taken from the old hunchbacked woman and struck the troll so that all five heads went flying over the sand.

Once the Princess saw she was saved, she was so delighted that she didn’t know how to contain herself. She danced and skipped about. “Now rest your head on my lap for a moment,” she told Little Shorty, and as he lay there, she dressed him in a garment of gold.

But it was not long before Sir Red climbed down from the tree, once he realized there was no longer any danger. He threatened the Princess until she promised she would claim he had rescued her—for if she did not, he would kill her. Then he took the troll’s lungs and tongue, placed them in his handkerchief, and escorted the Princess back to the palace. Whatever praise hadn’t already been heaped upon him was certainly given now. The King could not think of enough ways to honor him, and he always sat at the King’s right hand at the table.

As for Little Shorty, he first went aboard the troll’s boat and collected a large number of gold and silver belts, then scurried back to the palace. When the kitchen maid saw all that gold and silver, she was stunned, asking,  
“But dear, dear Little Shorty, where did you get all of this?”—she worried he might not have come by it honestly.  
“Oh,” answered Little Shorty, “I was back home for a while, and these belts just fell off some pails, so I brought them along for you.”  

When the maid heard it was for her, she didn’t question a thing further. She thanked Little Shorty, and all was well again.

On the second Thursday it happened the same way. Everyone was glum and anxious, but Sir Red declared he had already saved the Princess from one troll, so he could certainly save her from another. He led her down to the shore. Yet it is doubtful the troll suffered much from him this time either, for when it was time for the troll to appear, Sir Red said the same thing as last time: “Better for one person to die than two,” and scrambled back up into the tree.

Once again Little Shorty asked the kitchen maid if he could pop down to the shore.  
“Oh, what do you want there!” complained the maid.  
“Oh, please,” said Little Shorty, “let me have a little fun with the other boys down there.”  
So he got permission again, but only if he promised to be back in time to turn the roast, and to bring along a big pile of firewood.  

No sooner had Little Shorty reached the shore than the troll bombarded them in a flurry of noise and wind; it was twice as big this time, with ten heads.  
“Fire!” the troll roared.  
“Fire yourself!” said Little Shorty.  
“Can you fight?” yelled the troll.  
“If I can’t, I can surely learn!” said Little Shorty.  

Then the troll struck at him with its iron bar—even bigger than the first troll’s—sending earth flying ten yards into the air.  
“Pah!” said Little Shorty, “That was your blow, was it? Now see one of mine!”  

He grabbed his sword and struck the troll so that all ten heads went rolling over the sand.

Then the Princess said to him again: “Rest your head on my lap for a moment,” and while Little Shorty lay there, she dressed him in a garment of silver.

As soon as Sir Red saw that all was safe, he came down from the tree and threatened the Princess once more. She had to promise to say it was he who had rescued her. Then he took the troll’s tongue and lungs, stuffed them in his handkerchief, and led her back to the palace. The joy there was great, to be sure, and the King was at a loss as to how best to show Sir Red more honor or respect.

In the meantime, Little Shorty had filled his arms with gold and silver belts from the troll’s boat. On returning to the palace, the kitchen maid was astonished at all that treasure, but Little Shorty explained he had been home for a bit, and these belts had simply fallen off some pails, so he had brought them along for the maid. So she asked no more questions.

When the third Thursday night came, everything at the King’s palace was exactly as before: sadness, anxiety, the walls draped in black. But Sir Red said they needn’t fret so much. Had he killed two trolls already, he could surely kill the third as well. So he led the Princess back to the shore, but as the time of its arrival drew near, he again clambered up into a tree. The Princess wept and begged him to stay, but it was no use. He repeated his old line: “Better one life lost than two,” said Sir Red.

That evening, Little Shorty also asked the maid if he could pop down to the shore.  
“Oh, what’s your business there!” she asked.  
But he never stopped begging until she finally said yes, though he had to promise to be in the kitchen to turn the roast when needed.

He had scarcely reached the shore when the troll appeared in a whirlwind of noise and rushing wind—this one was much, much bigger than the others, with fifteen heads.  
“Fire!” howled the troll.  
“Fire yourself!” said Little Shorty.  
“Can you fight?” snarled the troll.  
“If I can’t, I can surely learn,” said Little Shorty.  
“I’ll teach you!” roared the troll, swinging its iron bar so mightily that it threw earth fifteen yards into the air.  
“Pah!” said Little Shorty. “That was your blow? Now see one of mine!”  

With that, he took up his sword and cut the troll down so that all fifteen heads went flying over the sand.

And so the Princess was saved, and she thanked and blessed Little Shorty for rescuing her. “Now rest your head on my lap for a moment,” she told him, and as he lay there, she dressed him in a garment of bronze.

“But how will we now reveal that it was you who saved me?” asked the Princess.  
“I know how,” replied Little Shorty. “When Sir Red escorts you home again and claims he’s the one who rescued you—so that everyone believes he’s to have you and half the kingdom—just wait until the wedding day. When they ask you who you want to serve the drinks, you must say: ‘I want the little boy from the kitchen, who carries firewood and water for the maid.’ The moment I pour the drinks, I’ll purposely spill a drop on his plate, but not on yours, and then he’ll get angry and strike me. We’ll do that three times. But the third time, you must say: ‘Shame on you for striking my beloved! He’s the one who saved me, and the one I shall have!’”

Then Little Shorty ran back to the palace just as before, but not before returning to the troll’s boat to gather up even more gold, silver, and other precious things, of which he once again brought a whole armload of belts to the kitchen maid.

No sooner did Sir Red see all danger had passed than he scurried down from the tree, threatened the Princess until she promised—in tears—that she would say he had rescued her. Then he escorted her back to the palace, and if great honor had been done to him before, it was certainly tenfold now. The King could scarcely think about anything but ways to celebrate the man who had saved his daughter from three trolls. He declared it was settled that Sir Red should have her hand in marriage and half the kingdom besides.

But on the wedding day, the Princess asked that the little boy from the kitchen, who carries firewood and water for the maid, be allowed to serve the cups at the table where the bride and groom would sit.  
“What do you want with that puny, ragged little boy in here?” asked Sir Red.  
But the Princess insisted that he be the one to serve the drinks and no other, and at last she got her way. And so it all went exactly as Little Shorty and the Princess had arranged: he spilled a single drop on Sir Red’s plate, but none on hers, and each time, Sir Red grew furious and slapped him. With the first slap, the ragged outfit fell away from Little Shorty, revealing bronze beneath. With the second slap, the bronze covering fell away, revealing silver. At the third slap, the silver fell away, and there he stood in golden garments that shone gorgeously around him.

Then the Princess said, “Shame on you for striking my beloved! He is the one who saved me; it’s him I want!”  

Sir Red swore up and down that he was the true rescuer, but the King said, “Whoever saved my daughter surely has some proof!” Off ran Sir Red to fetch his handkerchief with the trolls’ tongues and lungs inside, and Little Shorty brought out the gold, silver, and precious gems he had taken from the troll’s boat. Each laid his evidence out before the King.  

“The one who has such riches in gold and silver and jewels,” said the King, “he must be the slayer of the trolls. You can’t get such things anywhere else.” So Sir Red was thrown into the snake pit, and Little Shorty was to have the Princess and half the kingdom.

One day, the King and Little Shorty were walking together, and Little Shorty asked whether the King had had any more children.  
“Yes,” said the King, “there was one more daughter, but a troll took her away because there was no one who could rescue her. Now you shall have my other daughter, but if you can also save the one the troll took, then you shall have her and the other half of my kingdom as well.”  
“I guess I’ll give it a try,” said Little Shorty. “But I’ll need an iron cable five hundred yards long, five hundred men, and rations to feed them for fifteen weeks, for I’m going very far out to sea,” he said.

Yes, that was promised him, though the King worried he might not have a ship large enough to carry them all.  
“I have my own ship,” said Little Shorty, and he took the tiny one he had gotten from the old hunchbacked woman out of his pocket.  

The King laughed, thinking it was nothing but a joke, but Little Shorty only asked for what he had requested, saying the King would see soon enough.  

They gathered everything. Little Shorty asked them to place the iron cable in the ship first, but not a single man could lift it, and besides, there wasn’t room to maneuver around that tiny boat all at once. So Little Shorty took hold of one end of the cable himself and heaved a few links of it into the boat. And as he threw the loops of cable inside, the boat grew bigger and bigger, until finally it was large enough to hold the entire cable, all five hundred men, all the food, and Little Shorty with room to spare.

“Go forth over saltwater and freshwater, mountains and deep valleys, and don’t stop until you come to where the King’s daughter is,” Little Shorty commanded the ship. And immediately it surged away, whistling and howling across water and land alike.

At last, after sailing a long, long way, the ship came to a stop in the middle of the sea.  
“Well, we’re here,” said Little Shorty, “but the question is how we’ll get back from here again.” He took the iron cable and fastened one end around his waist. “I must go to the bottom,” he said, “but when I tug hard on the cable and want to come up again, all of you must hoist with all your strength, every single one of you, or else you might as well kiss your own lives goodbye, along with mine.”  

With that, he jumped into the water, sending yellow foam surging around him. He sank and sank until he reached the bottom, where he saw a vast rock face with a door in it. He went inside. Once there, he found the other Princess. She was sitting and sewing, and when she saw Little Shorty, she threw her hands into the air.  
“Oh, thank heaven!” she cried. “I have not seen another human soul since I arrived here.”  
“Well, I’ve come for you,” said Little Shorty.  
“Oh, you’ll never manage that,” replied the Princess. “Don’t even think of it. If the troll catches sight of you, he’ll devour you in no time.”  
“Just you mention him,” said Little Shorty. “Where is he anyway? I might just enjoy meeting him.”  

Then the Princess explained that the troll was out on an errand, trying to find someone who could brew one hundred barrels of malt in one go, for he was planning a feast and needed nothing less.  
“I can do that,” said Little Shorty.  
“Well, I only hope the troll won’t be too quick-tempered for me to get a chance to tell him,” said the Princess. “He’s so furious that he’ll tear you apart the moment he sets eyes on you, I fear. But let me try to think of something. You can hide in that storage shed, and we’ll see what happens.”

Little Shorty did just that, and no sooner had he crawled into the shed than the troll came in.  
“Ugh! It smells like human blood in here!” snarled the troll.  
“Yes, a bird flew over the roof carrying a human bone in its beak,” said the Princess, “and it dropped that bone right down the chimney. I made sure to throw it out at once, but maybe the smell is still lingering.”  
“Ah, perhaps that’s it,” said the troll.

Then the Princess asked if he had found anyone who could brew one hundred barrels of malt in one go.  
“No, there’s no one who can do that,” said the troll.  
“Well, not long before you came in, someone else came by saying he could,” said the Princess.  
“You’ve always been too clever for your own good,” growled the troll. “Why’d you let him leave, if you knew I needed somebody like that?”  
“Oh, I didn’t exactly let him go,” said the Princess, “but you’re so quick to anger that I hid him in the shed. If you haven’t found anyone else, well, he’s still here.”  
“Bring him in, then,” ordered the troll.  

When Little Shorty was brought out, the troll asked if it was true he could brew one hundred barrels of malt in a single batch.  
“Yes, I can,” replied Little Shorty.  
“Lucky for me I got hold of you,” said the troll. “But set to work right now, and heaven help you if the beer isn’t strong!”  
“Oh, it’ll have flavor, all right,” said Little Shorty, and he went to work at once. “But I need more trolls to carry water for the mash,” said Little Shorty. “The ones I have aren’t strong enough.”

Yes, so the troll summoned many more of his kind, so numerous they teemed everywhere, and the brewing proceeded. But once the wort was finished and everyone was going to taste—first the troll himself, and then the others—Little Shorty had brewed it so strongly that they dropped dead like flies, each as they took a drink. In the end, only an old, pitiful old woman who lay behind the stove was left alive.  
“Oh, poor thing,” said Little Shorty, “you must have a taste too!” He went and scraped the bottom of the vat with the ladle, letting her have it. And in that way he emptied them all.

As he looked around, he glimpsed a big chest. Little Shorty seized it and loaded it full of gold and silver, then tied the cable around himself, the Princess, and the chest, and gave a mighty yank. The crew immediately hauled them up in good shape. Once on the ship, Little Shorty said, “Now go over saltwater and freshwater, mountains and deep valleys, and do not stop until we land at the King’s palace!” Off the ship went with a roar of foam, and when they at the palace saw the ship coming, they made haste with music and celebration to greet them. They received Little Shorty with great joy, but happiest of all was the King, since now he also had his other daughter back.

But now Little Shorty was not entirely at ease. Both Princesses wanted him, and he only wanted the one he had rescued first—that was the youngest. But how was he to solve this problem without upsetting the older sister, too? He often went around thinking about this, up and down, until at last it occurred to him that if he just had his brother King Lavring with him—the brother who looked so much like him that no one could tell them apart—then his brother could marry the other Princess and take the other half of the kingdom, for Little Shorty felt half a kingdom was plenty for him alone.  

The moment that idea struck him, he ran outside the palace and shouted for King Lavring. Nobody came. He shouted again, a bit louder, still nobody. Then he shouted a third time with all his might, and suddenly his brother stood there.  
“I said you mustn’t call me unless you were in the very greatest danger,” said King Lavring. “And I see not so much as a mosquito here to harm you.” With that, he swung at Little Shorty, so the boy tumbled across the meadow.  
“Shame on you for hitting me!” cried Little Shorty. “First I’ve won one Princess and half the kingdom, then the other Princess and the other half of the kingdom, and I was just thinking of giving one Princess and half the kingdom to you! Now, is that a good reason to knock me around?”  

When King Lavring heard that, he begged his brother’s pardon, and at once they were good friends again.  

“You know,” said Little Shorty, “we look exactly alike, so that no one can tell us apart. Let’s swap clothes, and you go up into the palace—then the Princesses will think you’re me. Whichever one kisses you first, you marry, and I’ll have the other.” For he knew that the older Princess was stronger, and it would be clear enough how things would happen.  

King Lavring eagerly agreed. He exchanged garments with his brother and went in. When he stepped into the Princesses’ room, they believed he was Little Shorty, so they both surged forward at once. But the older sister, being bigger and stronger, pushed the younger aside, grabbed King Lavring around the neck, and kissed him. And so King Lavring got the older sister, while Little Shorty got the younger.  

And then, you may be sure, there was a wedding, one so grand it was heard of in seven kingdoms far and wide.