Little Aase the Goose Girl

Once upon a time there was a King who had so many geese that he needed a girl just to tend them. Her name was Aase, and so everyone called her Aase the Goose Girl.

Now, there was a Prince from England who was out seeking a wife; Aase put herself in his path.

“Are you sitting there, Little Aase?” asked the Prince.  
“Yes, I’m sitting here, sewing patch upon patch and patch upon patch. I’m waiting for the Prince from England today,” said Little Aase.  
“You can’t expect to get him,” said the Prince.  
“Oh, if I’m meant to have him, I’ll surely get him,” said Little Aase.

Then painters were sent to every land and kingdom to make portraits of the most beautiful princesses, so the Prince could choose among them. One of them he liked so much that he traveled to bring her back to marry her, and he was very glad and happy when she agreed to be his sweetheart. But the Prince had a Stone that he placed by his bed, and that Stone knew everything. When the Princess arrived, Aase the Goose Girl told her that if she had loved anyone before, or had any secret she did not wish the Prince to know, she must not step on that Stone by the bed, “for it will tell him everything about you,” said Aase. When the Princess heard that, she grew very worried, you can be sure. So she asked Aase to go in her place that night and lie beside the Prince, and when he had fallen asleep, they would switch again, so that the right Princess would be with him when morning came.

They did exactly this.

When Aase the Goose Girl came and stepped on the Stone, the Prince asked, “Who is it stepping into my bed?”  
“A pure and true maiden!” answered the Stone, and so they lay down to sleep. But in the middle of the night, the Princess came and took Aase’s place.  
In the morning, when they got up, the Prince asked the Stone again, “Who is it getting out of my bed?”  
“One who has had three sweethearts,” replied the Stone.

When the Prince heard that, of course he would not have her, and so he sent her back home and found himself another sweetheart instead.

When he went to visit the second Princess, Little Aase the Goose Girl was again sitting by the roadside.

“Are you sitting there, Little Aase the Goose Girl?” asked the Prince.  
“Yes, I’m sitting here, sewing patch upon patch and patch upon patch, for I’m waiting for the Prince from England today,” said Aase.  
“Oh, you surely can’t expect to get him,” said the Prince.  
“Oh yes, if I’m meant to have him, I’ll surely get him,” said Aase.

Things went just the same with this Princess as with the first one, except that when she rose in the morning, the Stone said she had six sweethearts. So the Prince would not have her either and sent her on her way. Yet he still wished to try one more time to see if he could find someone who was truly pure, so he searched far and wide in many lands until he found one he liked.

But as he traveled to meet her, Aase the Goose Girl was once again waiting for him.

“Are you sitting there, Little Aase the Goose Girl?” asked the Prince.  
“Yes, I’m sitting here, sewing patch upon patch and patch upon patch, for I’m waiting for the Prince from England today,” said Aase.  
“You can’t possibly expect to get him,” said the Prince.  
“Oh yes, if I’m meant to have him, then I’ll surely get him,” said Little Aase.

When that Princess arrived, Aase the Goose Girl told her, just as she had told the others, that if she had ever had a sweetheart or any other secret she did not want the Prince to know, she must not step on the Stone by his bed, “for it tells him everything,” said Aase. The Princess grew frightened when she heard this, but she was just as fearful as the others and begged Aase to take her place that evening and lie with the Prince, and when he was asleep, they would switch, so that the real Princess would be there at dawn.

They did so.

When Little Aase the Goose Girl came and stepped on the Stone, the Prince asked, “Who is it stepping into my bed?”  
“A pure and true maiden!” said the Stone, and they lay down.

In the middle of the night, the Prince slipped a ring onto Aase’s finger. The ring was so tight she could not take it off. The Prince suspected something was amiss and wanted a way to tell apart the right girl. Once the Prince was asleep, the Princess came, chased Aase back to the goose pen, and took her own place in the bed.

Come morning, as they rose, the Prince asked, “Who is it getting out of my bed?”  
“One who has had nine sweethearts,” said the Stone. When the Prince heard that, he grew so angry he sent her away immediately. Then he asked the Stone how things had gone with those Princesses who had stepped upon it, for he could not make sense of it. The Stone then explained how they had tricked him by having Aase the Goose Girl go in their place. Hearing this, the Prince went down to her—where she was tending the geese—to see if she still wore his ring. If she did, then, he thought, it was best to take her as his Queen.

When he got there, he saw right away she had a rag tied around one finger, and so he asked why she had done that.  
“Oh, I’ve cut myself so badly,” said Little Aase the Goose Girl.  
He asked to see the finger, but Aase did not want to remove the rag. The Prince took hold of her hand, while Aase tried to pull away again. The rag came off, and there he recognized his own ring. Then he brought her up to the Royal Palace and gave her all sorts of finery and splendid clothes; afterward, they held their wedding, and thus Little Aase the Goose Girl truly did get the Prince of England, simply because she was destined to have him.