4. The Question

Once upon a time there was a King who had a Daughter, 
who was so difficult and contrary in her words that nobody 
could silence her. He then proclaimed that whoever managed 
to do so would get the Princess for a wife and half the 
Kingdom as well. Three Brothers, who heard this, also 
wanted to try their luck. First went the two oldest, who 
believed themselves the cleverest; but they got nowhere 
with her, and were punished for it. Then the Ash Lad 
set out. After he had walked a little way along the road, 
he found a small twig fastener (a loop made from a thin, 
flexible branch); he picked it up. After going a bit more, 
he found a piece of a broken bowl; he picked that up too. 
A little farther on, he found a dead magpie, and not much 
later, a crooked goat’s horn; then shortly afterward, he 
found another one just like it. Right when he was walking 
across the fields near the King’s estate, where they had 
spread manure, he found a worn-out shoe sole. He took 
all of these things with him to the King’s estate, and 
then he went in to see the Princess.

“Good day,” he said.  
“Good day,” she said, twisting around.  
“May I roast my magpie?” he asked.  
“I’m afraid she’ll burst,” replied the Princess.  
“Oh, there’s no danger; I’ll wrap this twig fastener around her,” said the Lad, taking it out.  
“The fat will run off her,” said the Princess.  
“I’ll catch it with this,” said the Lad, showing the broken bowl.  
“You twist your words in crooked ways,” said the Princess.  
“No, I’m not crooked, but this is,” he said, holding up one goat’s horn.  
“I’ve never seen its match!” the Princess exclaimed.  
“Here’s the match,” said the Lad, taking out the other horn.  
“I suspect you have come here just to silence me, haven’t you?” said the Princess.  
“No, I haven’t come out for that, but this is worn out,” replied the Lad, pulling forth the worn-out shoe sole.  

Then the Princess was rendered speechless.  
“Now you are mine,” said the Lad, and thus he won her 
and got half the Land and Kingdom as well.  