Some Women Are Like That

Once upon a time there was a Man and a Wife who were going to sow their fields, but they had no seed grain, nor did they have any money to buy it. They owned only one Cow, and the Man was supposed to walk to town and sell it to get money for seed. But when it came down to it, the Wife didn’t dare let her Husband travel, because she was afraid he would spend all the money on drink. So she set off herself with the Cow and took along a Hen as well.

Close by the town, she met a Butcher.

“Are you selling the Cow, ma’am?” he asked.

“Yes, indeed I am,” she said.

“How much do you want for it?”

“I suppose I want one coin for the Cow, but I’ll let you have the Hen for ten coins,” she replied.

“Well,” he answered, “I don’t really need the Hen, and you’ll likely get rid of it when you get into town. But I’ll give you one coin for the Cow.”

She sold her Cow and received her one coin, but no one in town would give ten coins for a scrawny, mangy Hen. So she went back to the Butcher and said, “I can’t get rid of this Hen, sir! You might as well take it, you who bought the Cow in the first place.”

“That we can sort out,” said the Butcher. He invited her to his table, gave her food, and poured so much liquor for her that she became drunk and lost both her senses and memory.

While she slept it off, the Butcher dipped her in a tar barrel and laid her in a pile of feathers.

When she awoke, she was covered all over in feathers and started to wonder: “Is this me, or isn’t it me? No, it can never be me—it must be some strange, big bird. But how can I figure out if it is me or not? Yes, now I know how I can tell if it’s me: if the Calves lick me, and the Dog doesn’t bark at me when I get home, then it’s me.”

The Dog scarcely caught sight of such a creature before it set off in a fierce barking fit, as though there were both thieves and rascals on the farm. “No, that surely can’t be me,” she said. When she reached the Barn, the Calves wouldn’t lick her because they smelled the tar. “No, it can’t be me—it must be a strange bird,” she said. She then crawled up onto the storehouse roof, began flapping her arms as though they were wings, and tried to fly away.

When the Man saw this, he came out with his rifle and took aim.

“Oh, don’t shoot, don’t shoot!” cried his Wife. “It’s me!”

“Is that you?” said the Man. “Then don’t stand there like a goat. Come down and give an account of yourself.”

She climbed back down, but she hadn’t a single coin left, for the one coin she had gotten from the Butcher she had thrown away in her drunkenness. When the Man found out, he said, “You’re not any less foolish than you’ve been before,” and he got so angry that he said he would leave everything behind and never return, unless he met three other Women who were just as foolish as she.

He wandered off, and after he had gone a ways, he spotted a Woman who was running in and out of a newly built room with an empty sieve. Each time she ran in, she threw her apron over the sieve, as though she had something in it, and flipped the sieve over onto the floor.

“Why are you doing that, ma’am?” he asked.

“Oh, I’m only trying to bring in some sunlight,” she answered. “But I don’t understand how it is: when I’m outside, I have the sun caught in the sieve, but when I come in, I’ve lost it again. In my old room, I had plenty of sunlight, though I never carried in the least bit of it. If only someone could get me some sunlight, I’d gladly give him three hundred coins.”

“Do you have an axe?” asked the Man. “I’ll get you sunlight.”

He got himself an axe and cut window holes, for the carpenters had forgotten them. At once the sun shone in, and he received his three hundred coins.

“That’s one,” the Man thought to himself, and went on his way again.

After a while, he came to a house where a terrible shrieking and shouting was going on. In he went, and there he saw a Woman who was about to whack her Husband on the head with a mallet. Over his head she had pulled a shirt that had no opening for the neck.

“Are you trying to kill your Husband, ma’am?” he asked.

“No,” she said, “I only want a neckhole in this shirt.”

The Husband was crying out and carrying on, saying, “God help the one who has to put on a new shirt! I’d gladly give three hundred coins to anyone who could teach my Wife to make a neckhole in a shirt without doing it this way.”

“That’s quickly done. Just bring me a pair of scissors,” the other Man said. He got scissors, snipped a hole, and went on his way with his money.

“That’s the second,” he said to himself.

At long last he came to a farm. He thought he’d rest there a while, so he went inside.

“Where are you from, sir?” the Woman asked.

“I’m from Ringerike,” he answered.

“Oh no, no! Are you from Heaven?” she asked. “Then you must know Per the Second, my dear departed Husband?”

The Woman had been married three times; the first and the last Husbands were bad men, so she believed only the second had ended up blessed, for he had been a kind man.

“Yes, I know him well,” the Traveller said.

“How is he doing these days?” asked the Woman.

“Oh, poorly,” said the Man from Ringerike. “He wanders from farm to farm up there and hasn’t a bite to eat or a stitch of clothing on his body—money isn’t even worth mentioning.”

“God have mercy on him!” the Woman cried. “He shouldn’t have to go so ragged, not when he left so much behind. Look, here hangs a big loft full of clothes that belonged to him, and there’s a large trunk of money here too. If you’ll take it, I’ll lend you a Horse and Cart so you can drive it over to him. He can keep the Horse there and ride around in the Cart up in Heaven, because he needn’t walk.”

So the Man from Ringerike got an entire cartload of clothes and a trunk full of shining silver coins, as well as all the food and drink he wanted. Once he had gathered it all, he climbed up and drove on his way.

“That’s the third,” he told himself.

But out in the field, the Woman’s third Husband was plowing, and when he saw a stranger drive off with their Horse and gear, he went home and asked his Wife what sort of fellow was leaving with the blue Horse.

“Oh, that,” she said, “was a Man from Heaven. He told me it’s so miserable with Per the Second, my dear departed Husband, that he wanders from place to place there, with no clothes or money. So I gave him all the old clothes that were hanging here after him, along with that old trunk of silver coins.”

Her current Husband realized at once how things stood, so he saddled up a Horse and set off at top speed. It wasn’t long before he was right behind the Man on the Cart, but when the Traveller sensed it, he turned Horse and Cart into the thicket, plucked a handful of horsehair from the Horse, then scrambled up onto a small hill. There, he tied the horsehair to a birch tree, lay down beneath it, and began gazing and staring up at the clouds.

“No, no, no!” he said to himself when Per the Third came riding up. “No, I’ve never seen anything like it! I’ve never seen the likes of this!”

Per sat there staring at him for a while, wondering whether the fellow was mad or what this might be. Finally, he asked, “What are you lying there staring at?”

“No, never have I seen its equal!” said the other. “Someone just rode straight up to the sky on a blue Horse; see here, the hair’s left behind in the birch, and if you look up at the clouds, you can see his blue Horse there.”

Per glanced at the clouds, then looked at him, and said, “All I see is horsehair stuck to the birch.”

“No, you can’t see it from where you’re standing,” said the other. “But come over here, lie down, and look straight up. And be sure not to take your eyes off the clouds.”

While Per the Third lay there gaping up at the sky till his eyes watered, the Man from Ringerike took the Horse, climbed on, and rode away with both that and the cartload. Once the road noise reached Per’s ears, he jumped up. But he was so confused by how fast the other fellow rode off with his Horses that he didn’t think to give chase until it was too late.

Now he was left both broke and beaten. When he got home to his Wife, and she asked him what he’d done with the Horse, he said, “I gave that to Per the Second as well, because I thought it wasn’t right that he should have to rattle around from farm to farm in Heaven on a cart. Now he can sell the Cart and buy himself a proper Wagon.”

“Thank you for that! I never would have thought you were such a generous Man,” said his Wife.

When the other Man, who had gathered the six hundred coins and the cartload of clothes and money, finally got home, he saw that all the fields were plowed and sown. The first thing he asked his Wife was how she had managed to find seed grain.

“Well,” she said, “I’ve always heard that if a person sows something, he’ll get something in return, so I sowed the salt that the Northerner stored here. If only it rains soon, I think it’ll grow just fine.”

“Foolish you are, and foolish you’ll remain as long as you live,” said the Man. “But never mind, for the others are no better than you.”