About Askeladden, Who Stole the Troll’s Silver Ducks, Bedspread, and Golden Harp

Once upon a time there was a poor man who had three sons. When he passed away, the two oldest sons were to head out into the world to seek their fortune; but they did not want to take the youngest with them at all. “You there!” they said, “you’re not fit for anything except sitting and poking around in the ashes.”

“Then I’ll have to go alone,” said Askeladden.

The two brothers went off and came to the royal palace. There they got work—one with the stable master, and the other with the head gardener. Askeladden also set out and brought along a large kneading trough, which was the only thing the family had inherited from their parents; the other two hadn’t cared about it. It was heavy to carry, but he wasn’t about to leave it behind. After walking for a while, he too arrived at the royal palace and asked for work. They said they had no need of him, but he pleaded so earnestly that at last they allowed him to stay in the kitchen to carry firewood and water for the kitchen maid. He was diligent and clever, and it didn’t take long before everyone grew very fond of him; but his two brothers were lazy, which earned them scoldings and small wages. They became jealous of Askeladden when they saw that he was getting on better than they were.

Right across from the royal palace, on the other side of a lake, lived a Troll. It had seven silver ducks swimming on the lake, so they could be seen from the palace. The King had often wished he could have them, and so the two brothers told the stable master: “If our brother wanted to, he said he’d be able to get those seven silver ducks for the King.” You can well imagine it wasn’t long before the stable master told that to the King. The King summoned Askeladden before him and said, “Your brothers say that you can get me the silver ducks, and now you shall do it.”

“I’ve never thought or said such a thing,” replied the lad.

But the King wouldn’t hear otherwise. “You have said it, and you shall do it,” he said.

“Well then,” the lad answered, “if there’s no other way, let me have a small measure of rye and a small measure of wheat, and I’ll give it a try.” He got what he asked for and placed it in the wooden kneading trough he had brought from home, then rowed across the lake in it. Once on the other side, he began walking up and down the shore, scattering and scattering the grain, until at last he lured the ducks into the trough, and then rowed back as fast as he could.

When he was about halfway across, out came the Troll and caught sight of him.  
“Have you taken off with my seven silver ducks?” it bellowed.  
“Yes, indeed!” said the lad.  
“Are you coming back again anytime soon?” asked the Troll.  
“That may well happen,” said the lad.

When he returned to the King with the seven silver ducks, he was liked even better in the royal palace, and the King himself said it was well done. But his brothers grew even angrier and more jealous; to get back at him, they told the stable master that now Askeladden had promised to bring the Troll’s bedspread—one that had silver and gold squares in alternating patches—whenever he wished. The stable master didn’t waste any time in telling this to the King either. So the King said to the lad that his brothers claimed he had promised to obtain the Troll’s bedspread, with silver and gold squares, and if he did not bring it, he would lose his life. Askeladden replied that he had never thought or said such a thing, but it was no use, and he asked for three days to think it over. When the three days were up, he again rowed across the lake in his kneading trough and wandered around, keeping watch. Finally, he saw that they hung the bedspread out from the mountainside to air it, and when they had gone safely back inside the mountain, Askeladden snatched it and rowed away as fast as he could.

When he was about halfway across, out came the Troll and saw him.  
“Is it you who took my seven silver ducks?” roared the Troll.  
“Yes, indeed!” said the lad.  
“Have you now taken my bedspread with silver and gold squares, too?”  
“Yes, indeed!” said the lad.  
“Are you coming back again?”  
“That may well happen,” said the lad.

When he returned with the golden and silver bedspread, everyone liked him even more than before, and he became a personal servant to the King himself. Because of this, the other two brothers grew even more bitter. In retaliation, they told the stable master: “Now our brother has said he can get the King the golden harp that the Troll has, the one that makes everyone happy as soon as they hear it, no matter how downhearted they may be.”

Of course, the stable master immediately repeated these words to the King, who said to the lad, “If you have said it, then you shall do it. If you can, you shall have the Princess and half the kingdom; but if you cannot, you will lose your life.”

“I have never thought or said such a thing,” answered Askeladden, “but there’s probably no other way, so I’ll give it a try. However, I need six days to think about it.” That he was granted, but when the six days were over, he had to set out. He put a nail, a birch stick, and a candle stump in his pocket, rowed across, and prowled around outside. After a while the Troll came out and saw him.

“Is it you who took my seven silver ducks?” shouted the Troll.  
“Yes, indeed!” replied the lad.  
“And you’re the one who took my bedspread with silver and gold squares, likewise?” asked the Troll.  
“Yes, indeed!” said the lad.

Then the Troll grabbed him and took him into the mountain. “Now, my daughter,” it said, “I’ve finally caught the one who took my silver ducks and my bedspread with silver and gold squares. Put him in the feeding pen so we can slaughter him and invite our friends over.” She had no objection, so she placed him in the pen, and there he stood for eight days, getting as much of the best food and drink as he could wish for.

After those eight days, the Troll said to his daughter that she should go down and cut him in the little finger, so they could see whether he was fat. She went down to the pen. “Give me your little finger!” she said; but Askeladden poked out the nail instead, and she cut that.  
“Oh no! He’s still as tough as iron,” said the Troll’s daughter when she got back to her father. “We can’t take him just yet.”

After another eight days, it went the same way, except that Askeladden now poked out the birch stick instead. “A little better,” she said when she returned to the Troll, “but he’d still be as tough to chew as wood.”

After another eight days, the Troll told his daughter once more to go see if he was fat enough. “Give me your little finger!” said the Troll’s daughter when she arrived at the pen. This time Askeladden held out the candle stump.  
“He’s ready now,” she said.

“Good!” said the Troll. “Then I’ll head off to invite our guests to the feast. In the meantime, you slaughter him and boil half of him and roast the other half.”

Once the Troll had gone, the daughter began sharpening a big, long knife.  
“Is that the knife you’re going to butcher me with?” asked the lad.  
“Yes, it is!” said the Troll’s daughter.  
“But it’s not sharp,” said the lad. “I’d better sharpen it for you, so you can finish me off more easily.”

She handed him the knife, and he set to grinding and sharpening it.  
“Let me test it on your braid,” said the lad. “I think it should be good enough now.” She agreed, but the moment he caught hold of her braid, he pulled her head back and cut it off. Then he boiled half of her and roasted the other half, setting it all on the table. Next, he put on her clothes and sat down in a corner.

When the Troll came home with the banquet guests, he asked his daughter—who he thought was sitting there—whether she wasn’t going to sit down and eat too.  
“No,” answered the lad, “I don’t want to eat; I feel so sad and gloomy.”  
“Oh, you know what to do for that,” said the Troll. “Get the golden harp and play on it!”

“Where is it now, then?” asked Askeladden in return.  
“You know that perfectly well—you’re the last one who used it yourself. There it hangs, right above the door!”

Askeladden didn’t need to be told twice. He took it, slipped outside, and played as he went. But in the middle of it all, he shoved the kneading trough into the water and rowed off so fast it foamed around the trough.

After a while, the Troll thought his daughter was taking too long outside, so he went after her to see what was wrong. Then he spotted the lad far, far out on the water in the trough.  
“Is that you who took my seven silver ducks?” roared the Troll.  
“Yes, indeed,” said Askeladden.  
“And you who took my bedspread with silver and gold squares, too?”  
“Yes, indeed,” said Askeladden.  
“Have you taken my golden harp as well?” the Troll shrieked.  
“Yes, I certainly have,” said the lad.  
“Haven’t I eaten you all the same, then?”  
“No, that was your daughter you ate,” Askeladden replied.

When the Troll heard that, he grew so furious that he burst. Askeladden then rowed back and took with him a whole load of gold and silver— as much as the trough could carry. When he came to the royal palace with the golden harp, he received the Princess and half the kingdom, just as the King had promised him. But he treated his brothers well, for he believed that all they had said had only been for his own good.