About the Boy Who Went to the North Wind
and Demanded the Flour Back

Once upon a time, there was an old woman who had a son.  
Because she was poor and frail, the son had to go to the storage house  
to fetch some porridge flour for their midday meal.  
But as he stepped out onto the storage house steps,  
the North Wind came gusting along, seized the flour from him,  
and carried it up into the air.  

The boy went back inside for more flour,  
but as soon as he stepped out onto the steps again,  
the North Wind flew by once more and took the flour.  
This happened the third time too.  
The boy became angry and thought it was unreasonable  
for the North Wind to behave that way,  
so he decided he would look for him and demand the flour back.  

He set off on his journey; it was a long road,  
and he walked and walked until, at last,  
he came to where the North Wind lived.  

“Good day,” said the boy, “and thanks for last time.”  

“Good day,” answered the North Wind,  
in a gruff manner, “and thanks for last time yourself.  
What do you want?” he asked.  

“Well,” the boy said, “I’d like to ask you if  
you could please give me back the flour you took  
from me on the storage house steps. We have so little,  
and if you’re going to swoop around taking  
what little we do have, we’ll only starve to death.”  

“I don’t have any flour,” said the North Wind,  
“but since you’re in such need, I’ll give you a tablecloth.  
It will provide anything you can wish for  
as soon as you say: ‘Tablecloth, spread yourself out  
and serve up all kinds of delicious dishes!’”  

The boy was well satisfied with this.  
But his way home was too long for him to get back that day,  
so he stopped at an inn along the way.  
When evening came and the people there were about to eat,  
he laid the tablecloth on a small table in the corner and said,  
“Tablecloth, spread yourself out and serve up all kinds of delicious dishes!”  

No sooner had he said it than the tablecloth did just that.  
Everyone thought it was a marvelous thing,  
but nobody liked it more than the innkeeper’s wife.  
After all, it was no great bother to roast and cook,  
to lay and clear the table, to carry out and serve everything  
on that cloth, she thought.  

So, when it grew late and everyone was asleep,  
she took the boy’s tablecloth and replaced it with another  
that looked exactly like it but couldn’t even serve up oat flatbread.  

When the boy woke up, he took his tablecloth and left,  
and that day he arrived back home to his mother.  

“Well,” he said, “I’ve been to see the North Wind.  
He’s a decent fellow after all, for he gave me this tablecloth,  
and as soon as I say to it: ‘Tablecloth, spread yourself out  
and serve up all kinds of delicious dishes!’  
I get all the food I could wish for.”  

“Yes, I’m sure,” his mother replied,  
“but I won’t believe it until I see it.”  

The boy hurried to set out a table,  
laid the cloth upon it, and said,  
“Tablecloth, spread yourself out and serve up  
all kinds of delicious dishes!”  
But the tablecloth did not even manage  
to serve a single piece of flatbread.  

“There’s no help for it but to go back  
to the North Wind again,” said the boy, and off he went.  
By afternoon he came once more to where the North Wind lived.  

“Good evening,” said the boy.  

“Good evening,” said the North Wind.  

“I’d like justice for the flour you took from me,”  
said the boy. “Because the tablecloth I received  
was of no use.”  

“I don’t have any flour,” said the North Wind.  
“But here is a goat that makes gold coins  
as soon as you say: ‘My goat, make money!’”  

The boy thought this sounded good.  
But since getting home would again take him an entire day,  
he stayed another night at the same inn.  
Before asking them for anything, he tested the goat,  
because he wanted to be sure that what the North Wind said was true.  
And sure enough, it was.  
When the innkeeper saw this, he thought it was a fine goat indeed,  
so when the boy had fallen asleep,  
he switched it with another goat that definitely  
didn’t produce gold coins.  

The next morning the boy set off, and when he arrived home,  
he said to his mother, “The North Wind is kind after all;  
he’s given me a goat that can make gold coins  
just by saying: ‘My goat, make money!’”  

“I’m sure,” said his mother, “that’s nothing but talk,  
and I won’t believe it until I see it.”  

“My goat, make money!” the boy said.  
But it most certainly did not produce money.  

So he returned to the North Wind again,  
saying the goat was no good,  
and that he wanted justice for the flour.  

“Well, I have nothing else to give you,” said the North Wind,  
“but that old stick, over there in the corner.  
It’s special: if you say, ‘My stick, lay on!’ it will beat away  
until you say, ‘My stick, stand still!’”  

Since the way home was long,  
the boy stopped at the same inn that evening.  
But now he had a sense of what had happened  
to the tablecloth and the goat,  
so he lay down on a bench right away  
and pretended to sleep.  

The innkeeper, who guessed the stick must be worth something,  
found one that looked just like it and was about to swap them,  
when he heard the boy snoring.  
But the moment the innkeeper touched the boy’s stick,  
the boy shouted: “My stick, lay on!”  

And that stick started thumping the innkeeper,  
making him jump over tables and benches,  
crying and wailing, “Oh Lord! Oh Lord!  
Make that stick stop, or it will kill me!  
You’ll get back both your tablecloth and your goat!”  

When the boy figured the innkeeper had been punished enough,  
he said, “My stick, stand still,” took his tablecloth  
and tucked it in his pocket, took hold of the stick,  
tied a rope around the goat’s horns,  
and went home with everything.  
That was good justice for the flour!  