THE THREE AUNTS

Once upon a time there was a poor man who lived in a little house far deep in the forest, and he earned his living by hunting. He had one only daughter, and she was both beautiful and kind. Her mother had passed away early, and once the girl was half-grown, she said she wanted to go among other people so that she too could learn to earn her bread.  
“Yes, my daughter,” said her father, “truly, you haven’t learned much else with me besides how to pluck birds and cook them, but you’ll just have to try to make your own way all the same.”

So the girl set out to look for work, and after she had walked for a while, she came to the royal palace. She was hired there, and the Queen thought so highly of her that the other maids became downright envious of her. They contrived to tell the Queen that this girl had claimed she could spin a pound of flax in twenty-four hours—because the Queen took great delight in all kinds of handicraft.  
“Well,” said the Queen, “if you have said it, then you shall do it. But you can certainly have a little more time.”  

The poor girl did not dare say she had never spun before. She only asked for a room of her own; she got it, and there they brought a spinning wheel and the flax. She sat there crying and feeling miserable, not knowing what on earth to do; she fiddled with the spinning wheel, turning and shifting it about. She had never even seen a spinning wheel before, let alone knew how to use one.

But as she was sitting like that, an old woman came in to see her.  
“What troubles you, my child?” the woman asked.  
“Oh,” the girl replied, “it can’t help me to tell you; you couldn’t assist me anyway!”  
“No one can know that for certain,” said the woman. “Perhaps I might have a way to help after all.”  

Well, I may as well tell her, thought the girl. So she explained how her fellow maids had spread the rumor that she had boasted she could spin a pound of flax in twenty-four hours—  
“And I, poor thing,” she said, “have never in my life even seen a spinning wheel, let alone spun so large an amount in one day.”  
“That’s no matter, child,” said the old woman. “If you will call me Aunt on your day of honor, then I will spin it for you. In the meantime, you can go sleep.”

The girl gladly agreed, went off, and lay down to rest. When she awoke the next morning, all the flax lay spun upon the table, so neatly and finely done that no one had ever seen such even and beautiful thread. The Queen was very pleased with the splendid thread she was given, and she was now even fonder of the girl than before. But this made the other maids all the more jealous of her, so they schemed again and told the Queen that the girl had said she could weave the very same flax she had spun, in just twenty-four hours. The Queen repeated her words: if she had claimed it, she must do it—though if it were not exactly in twenty-four hours, she could have a bit more time.  

Yet again, the girl did not dare say no. She simply asked for a room of her own and resolved she would try somehow. There she sat weeping and in distress, not knowing what to do with herself. Suddenly, another old woman came in to her and asked, “What is the matter, my child?” The girl did not wish to speak of it at first, but in the end, she confided in her, pouring out her sorrow.  
“Well,” said this old woman, “it is all the same. If you will call me Aunt on your day of honor, I shall weave for you, and you can go lie down and sleep.”

The girl was delighted to do so, and she went and lay down again. When she awoke, the bundle of woven cloth lay there on the table, so tightly and neatly done that it could not be any finer. She took the bundle and brought it down to the Queen, who was delighted at having obtained such wonderful fabric. The Queen grew even more fond of the girl than before. But the other maids became all the more spiteful, and they wouldn’t give up trying to undo her good fortune.

Finally, they told the Queen that the girl had said she could sew the woven cloth into shirts in twenty-four hours. It went exactly as before: the girl did not dare say she did not know how to sew. She was given a room of her own yet again, where she sat crying in sorrow. But then a third old woman came in, offering to sew for her, if only she would call her Aunt on her day of honor. The girl promised more than willingly, did as the old woman said, and went to lie down to rest. When she awoke in the morning, she found the entire bundle of cloth sewn into shirts lying on the table—no one had ever seen stitching so perfectly done, and the shirts were fully completed with embroidered names.

When the Queen came in and saw the work, she clapped her hands in delight. “Never have I owned or seen such fine needlework,” she said, and from that moment on, she cherished the girl like her own child.  
“If you wish to marry the Prince, then you shall have him,” she told the girl. “You need never send anything out to be done, for you can spin and weave and sew everything yourself.” As the girl was both lovely to look at and found favor with the Prince, the wedding was held at once.

But just when the Prince had sat down at the wedding feast with his bride, an old, ugly woman hobbled in with a nose surely three ells long—nearly six feet! The bride stood up, curtsied, and said: “Good day, Aunt!”  
“Is this an aunt of my bride’s?” asked the Prince.  
Yes, indeed she was.  
“Well then,” said the Prince, “she’d best come in and sit at the table.” But both he and everyone else thought she was most unpleasant to have there at the feast.

No sooner had she sat down than another ugly old woman entered; she had a backside so broad and heavy that she could barely squeeze through the door. At once, the bride rose and greeted her, “Good day, Aunt!” The Prince asked again if that was another aunt of his bride’s. Both replied yes, so the Prince said that in that case, she, too, must take a seat at the banquet.  

But scarcely had she sat down before yet a third hideous old woman appeared, with eyes as large as platters, so red and watery it was frightening to see. The bride rose yet again and greeted her: “Good day, Aunt!” The Prince also asked her to sit at the table, though he was not happy about it, and thought to himself: “Heaven help me, what a set of aunts my bride has!”

After they had all sat there a while, he could hold back no longer and asked: “But how in the world can my bride, who is so lovely, have such ugly and misshapen aunts?”  
“I can tell you that,” replied the first woman. “I was as bright and fair as your bride when I was her age, but my nose got pulled and stretched hideously long because I spent all my time bending and nodding over my spinning. It was always on and on.”  
“And I,” said the second one, “ever since I was young, I have pushed a looming beater back and forth all day. That’s why my backside has grown so large and swollen, as you see.”  
Then the third one said, “From when I was just a little girl, I’ve sat there day and night squinting at my sewing. That is why my eyes have become so dreadful and red, and now there’s no help for them.”

“Oh my,” said the Prince, “it’s good I learned that in time! If people can become so awful and deformed from doing such work, then my bride shall never spin or weave or sew another day in her life!”

And from that day on, she did not.