Paal Andrestuen

There was once a Woman who had a deaf Husband,
and he was quite simple; but because of that, she
cared all the more for the Boy in the other house,
whom they called Paal Andrestuen.

The farmhand who worked for the deaf Man noticed
very well that there was something going on between
those two, and so he said to the Woman one day:
“Do you dare bet ten coins, Mother, that I can make
you reveal your own shame?”

“Yes, I dare,” she said, and so they bet
the ten coins.

One day, the Boy and the deaf Man
were in the barn, threshing, when the Boy noticed
that Paal Andrestuen had come to see the Woman.
He said nothing; but quite a while before midday break,
he turned toward the barn door and suddenly shouted:
“Yes indeed!”

“Well, are we going inside already?” said the Man,
who hadn’t noticed anything.

“Yes, I suppose we are, since Mother is calling,”
said the Boy.

When they reached the entryway, the Boy began
to cough and clear his throat so that the Woman could
hide Paal Andrestuen. When they then came in, there
was a bowl of sour cream porridge on the table.

“Well, well, Mother!” said the Man. “Are we having
sour cream porridge today?”

“Oh yes, you are,” said the Woman, who was sullen
and upset.

When they had finished eating and gone outside again,
she said to Paal: “That Boy is such a devil;
this was all his fault. But now you’d better be off;
I’ll come down to the Meadow with your midday meal.”

The Boy was standing in the entryway, listening.

“Father,” he said, “now I think it’s best for us
to go down into the valley and fix the section of
the fence that’s been blown over, because the pigs
they have at the other house are rooting up our Meadow.”

“Yes, I guess we’d better,” the Man said,
for he did everything they told him.

At midday, the Woman came shuffling
down to the Meadow, carrying something in her apron.

“Well, well, Mother! I don’t think you’re yourself
anymore,” the Man said. “Are we going to have
a midday meal as well?”

“Oh yes, you are,” she answered; she was even
more upset now.

And so they ate well and had both lefse and butter,
and they got liquor too.

“I’ll go take a bit over to Paal Andrestuen
as well, Mother,” said the Boy, “since he probably
hasn’t had any midday meal.”

“Yes, do that,” said the Woman; and with that,
she became calm again.

On the way, the Boy tore up the lefse and dropped
a bit here and there as he walked.

To Paal Andrestuen he said: “You’d better watch out;
our Old Man has noticed that you come here to see
the Woman rather often, and he doesn’t like that
one bit. He’s sworn that he’ll chop you with the axe
the moment he sees you.”

Paal got frightened and uneasy, and the Boy went
back to the Man.

“There’s something unfinished with Paal’s plow,”
he said, “and he asked if you would bring your axe
and come fix it a bit.”

So, the Man went and brought his axe, but Paal
Andrestuen didn’t catch sight of him before he
ran off as fast as he could. The Man turned and
looked at the plow from every angle, and when he
couldn’t see anything wrong with it, he went back;
but on the way he picked up the bits of lefse
the Boy had dropped. The Woman stood for a while,
watching him, and wondered what he was gathering.

“Oh, Father’s probably picking up stones,” said
the Boy, “because he’s noticed that Paal Andrestuen
comes too often to see us, and he doesn’t like
that one bit. He’s sworn that he’ll stone Mother
to death.”

Off the Woman went as fast as she could.

“What’s Mother rushing off for?” asked the Man
when he got there.

“Oh, there’s probably a fire at home,” the Boy said.

The Man ran after her, and the Woman ran on, shouting:
“Oh, don’t kill me, don’t kill me! I promise never
to let Paal Andrestuen come to me again!”

“Now the ten coins are mine,” shouted the Boy.