Gudbrand in Lien

Once upon a time, there was a man named Gudbrand. He had a farm that lay far away on a hillside, so people called him Gudbrand in Lien. He and his wife got along so well and were so fond of each other that everything the husband did seemed to her so well done that it could not possibly be better. Whatever he did, she was just as pleased with it. They owned their land, and they had one hundred crowns at the bottom of a trunk, plus two tethered cows in the barn.

But one day, the wife said to Gudbrand:  
“I think we should travel into town with one of the cows and sell it so we can get some pocket money. We’re decent people and should have a few coins on hand, like everyone else. We can’t start spending those hundred crowns at the bottom of the trunk, but I don’t really see what we need two cows for. Besides, I’d gain a bit of ease if I only had to look after one cow instead of shoveling and taking care of two.”  

Gudbrand thought that was both properly and sensibly said. He took the cow straight away and walked to town to sell it. But when he arrived, there was no one who wanted to buy the cow. “Well, well,” thought Gudbrand, “then I can simply go back home with my cow. I know I have both a stall and a collar for it, and it’s just as far back as it was here.” So he set off on his way home again.

Before long, he met someone who had a horse to sell. Gudbrand thought it would be better to have a horse than a cow, so he traded. After walking a bit farther, he met a man who was driving a fat pig in front of him, and Gudbrand thought having a fat pig was better than a horse, so he traded for that.  

He kept walking and soon met a man with a goat, and then he thought, “Surely a goat is better than a pig,” so he traded his pig for the goat. After walking a long way, he met a man with a sheep. He traded again, thinking, “It’s always better to have a sheep than a goat.”  

He walked on a while longer and met a man with a goose, so he traded his sheep for the goose. And after walking even farther, he met a man with a rooster, which he traded for the goose, thinking to himself, “It’s always better to have a rooster than a goose.” He walked on until late in the day, and then he started feeling hungry. So he sold the rooster for twelve coins and bought himself something to eat, for “It’s always better to save your own life than to keep a rooster,” thought Gudbrand in Lien.

He continued homeward until he came to the nearest neighboring farm; there, he stopped in.  
“How did it go for you in town?” the people asked.  

“Oh, so and so,” said Gudbrand. “I can’t exactly brag about my luck, and I can’t exactly blame it either.” And with that, he told them everything that had happened to him from start to finish.  

“Well, you’ll surely get a proper welcome when you return home to your wife!” said the man on the neighboring farm. “God help you; I wouldn’t want to be in your place.”  

“I think it could have gone a lot worse,” said Gudbrand in Lien. “In any case, whether things turned out badly or well, I have such a kind wife that she never says anything, however I choose to handle things.”  

“Yes, I suppose so—but I’m not sure I believe it,” the neighbor said.  

“Shall we place a wager on it?” said Gudbrand in Lien. “I have a hundred crowns lying at the bottom of my trunk; do you dare put something up against it?”  

They wagered, and Gudbrand stayed there until evening, when it began to grow dark. Then the two of them walked together to Gudbrand’s farm. The neighbor stood outside the door to listen, while Gudbrand went in to speak with his wife.  

“Good evening,” said Gudbrand in Lien, when he came in.  

“Good evening,” said his wife. “Thank heaven you’re here!”  

Yes, there he was.  

Then the wife asked how things had gone for him in town.  

“Oh, so and so,” answered Gudbrand. “It’s nothing to boast about. When I arrived in town, nobody would buy the cow, so I traded it for a horse.”  

“Well, thank you so much for that,” said his wife. “We’re respectable enough folks to drive to church just like everyone else, and if we can afford a horse, by all means we should get one. Go and put the horse away, children!”  

“Yes,” said Gudbrand, “but I don’t actually have the horse anymore. After a while on the road, I traded it for a pig.”  

“Oh no, no!” exclaimed his wife. “That’s just exactly what I would have done myself; I thank you for that! Now we can have bacon in the house and have something to serve people when they visit. Why should we need a horse? Folks would only say we’d gotten too fancy to walk to church like before. Go and put the pig away, children!”  

“But I don’t have the pig here either,” said Gudbrand. “A bit further on, I traded it for a milk goat.”  

“Oh dear, oh dear, how wisely you do everything!” cried his wife. “What would I do with a pig, when I really think about it? People would only say, ‘Over there, they eat everything they own.’ No, now I have a goat, so I can get both milk and cheese, and still keep the goat. Let the goat in, children!”  

“No, I don’t have the goat anymore,” said Gudbrand. “After a while, I traded the goat for a fine sheep.”  

“No!” exclaimed his wife. “You have done exactly as I would wish for everything, exactly as if I had been along. What would I do with a goat? I’d have to roam high and low to bring it in every evening. No, if I have a sheep, I can get wool and clothes in the house, and food as well. Go and let the sheep in, children!”  

“But I don’t have the sheep anymore,” said Gudbrand. “When I’d gone on a bit, I traded it for a goose.”  

“Thank you for that,” said his wife, “and many thanks as well! What do I need with a sheep? I don’t have a spinning wheel or a distaff, and I don’t care much about tugging and toiling to make clothes, either. We can buy clothes, like we always have. Now I’ll get goose meat, which I’ve been longing for, and I can put goose down in my little pillow. Go and bring the goose in, children!”  

“Yes, I don’t have the goose anymore, either,” said Gudbrand. “A bit farther on, I traded it for a rooster.”  

“God only knows how you’ve thought of all this!” his wife cried. “Everything is just as I would have done it myself. A rooster! That’s the same as if you’d bought an eight-day clock, because every morning at four, the rooster crows, so we can get up at the right time. What would we do with a goose? To be honest, I don’t even know how to prepare goose meat, and I could always fill my pillow with sedge grass. Go on out and bring in the rooster, children!”  

“But I don’t have the rooster, either,” said Gudbrand. “After walking a bit further, I got really hungry, and so I had to sell the rooster for twelve coins to save my life.”  

“Well, thank heaven you did that,” cried his wife. “No matter how you carry on, you do everything exactly the way I’d have wished. What would we need with a rooster anyway? We’re our own masters; we can lie in bed as long as we please in the morning. Thank heaven, as long as I’ve got you back, who does everything so well, I don’t need roosters or geese, pigs or cows!”  

Then Gudbrand opened the door.  
“Have I won the hundred crowns now?” he asked. And the neighbor had to admit that indeed he had.