The Rooster and the Hen in the Nut Forest

The Rooster and the Hen once went into the Nut Forest to gather nuts. The Hen got a piece of nut shell stuck in her throat and lay there, flapping her wings. The Rooster had to fetch water for her. 
He came to the Spring and said: 
“Dear Spring, give me water; I will give the water to my Hen, who is lying at death’s door in the Nut Forest.”

The Spring answered: 
“You will get no water from me before I get leaves from you.”

So the Rooster ran to the Linden Tree: 
“Dear Linden, give me leaves; I will give the leaves to the Spring, and the Spring will give me water, and I will give the water to my Hen, who is lying at death’s door in the Nut Forest.”

“You will get no leaves from me before I get red gold ribbons from you,” replied the Linden Tree.

So the Rooster ran to the Virgin Mary: 
“Dear Virgin Mary, give me red gold ribbons; I will give the red gold ribbons to the Linden, the Linden will give me leaves, the leaves I will give to the Spring, the Spring will give me water, and I will give the water to my Hen, who is lying at death’s door in the Nut Forest.”

“You will get no red gold ribbons from me before I get shoes from you,” replied the Virgin Mary.

So the Rooster ran to the Cobbler: 
“Dear Cobbler, give me shoes; I will give the shoes to the Virgin Mary, she will give me red gold ribbons, I will give the ribbons to the Linden, the Linden will give me leaves, I will give the leaves to the Spring, the Spring will give me water, and I will give the water to my Hen, who is lying at death’s door in the Nut Forest.”

“You will get no shoes from me before I get bristles from you,” replied the Cobbler.

So the Rooster ran to the Sow: 
“Dear Sow, give me bristles; I will give the bristles to the Cobbler, the Cobbler will give me shoes, I will give the shoes to the Virgin Mary, she will give me red gold ribbons, I will give the ribbons to the Linden, the Linden will give me leaves, I will give the leaves to the Spring, the Spring will give me water, and I will give the water to my Hen, who is lying at death’s door in the Nut Forest.”

“You will get no bristles from me before I get grain from you,” replied the Sow.

So the Rooster ran to the Woodworker: 
“Dear Woodworker, give me grain; I will give the grain to the Sow, the Sow will give me bristles, I will give the bristles to the Cobbler, the Cobbler will give me shoes, I will give the shoes to the Virgin Mary, she will give me red gold ribbons, I will give those ribbons to the Linden, the Linden will give me leaves, I will give the leaves to the Spring, the Spring will give me water, and I will give the water to my Hen, who is lying at death’s door in the Nut Forest.”

“You will get no grain from me before I get flatbread from you,” replied the Woodworker.

So the Rooster ran to the Baker: 
“Dear Baker, give me flatbread; I will give the flatbread to the Woodworker, the Woodworker will give me grain, I will give the grain to the Sow, the Sow will give me bristles, I will give the bristles to the Cobbler, the Cobbler will give me shoes, I will give the shoes to the Virgin Mary, she will give me red gold ribbons, I will give the ribbons to the Linden, the Linden will give me leaves, I will give the leaves to the Spring, the Spring will give me water, and I will give the water to my Hen, who is lying at death’s door in the Nut Forest.”

“You will get no flatbread from me before I get firewood from you,” replied the Baker.

So the Rooster ran to the Woodcutter: 
“Dear Woodcutter, give me firewood; I will give the firewood to the Baker, the Baker will give me flatbread, I will give the flatbread to the Woodworker, the Woodworker will give me grain, I will give the grain to the Sow, the Sow will give me bristles, I will give the bristles to the Cobbler, the Cobbler will give me shoes, I will give the shoes to the Virgin Mary, she will give me red gold ribbons, I will give the ribbons to the Linden, the Linden will give me leaves, I will give the leaves to the Spring, the Spring will give me water, and I will give the water to my Hen, who is lying at death’s door in the Nut Forest.”

“You will get no firewood from me before I get an axe from you,” replied the Woodcutter.

So the Rooster ran to the Blacksmith: 
“Dear Blacksmith, give me an axe; I will give the axe to the Woodcutter, the Woodcutter will give me firewood, I will give the firewood to the Baker, the Baker will give me flatbread, I will give the flatbread to the Woodworker, the Woodworker will give me grain, I will give the grain to the Sow, the Sow will give me bristles, I will give the bristles to the Cobbler, the Cobbler will give me shoes, I will give the shoes to the Virgin Mary, she will give me red gold ribbons, I will give the ribbons to the Linden, the Linden will give me leaves, I will give the leaves to the Spring, the Spring will give me water, and I will give the water to my Hen, who is lying at death’s door in the Nut Forest.”

“You will get no axe from me before I get charcoal from you,” replied the Blacksmith.

So the Rooster ran to the Charcoal Burner: 
“Dear Charcoal Burner, give me charcoal; I will give the charcoal to the Blacksmith, the Blacksmith will give me an axe, I will give the axe to the Woodcutter, the Woodcutter will give me firewood, I will give the firewood to the Baker, the Baker will give me flatbread, I will give the flatbread to the Woodworker, the Woodworker will give me grain, I will give the grain to the Sow, the Sow will give me bristles, I will give the bristles to the Cobbler, the Cobbler will give me shoes, I will give the shoes to the Virgin Mary, she will give me red gold ribbons, I will give those ribbons to the Linden, the Linden will give me leaves, I will give the leaves to the Spring, the Spring will give me water, and I will give the water to my Hen, who is lying at death’s door in the Nut Forest.”

Then the Charcoal Burner took pity on the Rooster and gave him charcoal. So the Blacksmith got charcoal and gave the Rooster an axe, the Woodcutter got the axe and gave firewood, the Baker got firewood and gave flatbread, the Woodworker got flatbread and gave grain, the Sow got grain and gave bristles, the Cobbler got bristles and gave shoes, the Virgin Mary got shoes and gave red gold ribbons, the Linden got red gold ribbons and gave leaves, the Spring got leaves and gave water, and the Rooster brought the water to his Hen, who lay at death’s door in the Nut Forest. Thus she was cured and became well again.