Giske

Once upon a time there was a widower. He had a housekeeper named Giske, and she very much wished to marry him. She pestered him constantly, asking him to take her for his wife. In the end he grew so tired of it that he did not know what to do to get rid of her.

Then, in the period between haymaking and grain harvesting, when the hemp was ripe, they were going out to pull hemp. Giske always thought she was so pretty, and so handy and clever, and so she kept pulling hemp until she grew dizzy from the strong smell. She fell over and lay there, fast asleep, in the hemp field. While she slept, the man came with a pair of scissors and cut her skirt off. Then he smeared her all over, first with tallow and then with pipe soot, so that she looked worse than the Devil himself.

When Giske woke and saw how dreadful she looked, she did not recognize herself. “Could this be me?” said Giske. “No, it can’t be me, because I’ve never been so horrible. It must be the Devil himself.”

But now she wanted to know what was going on, so she went off and knocked on her master’s door and asked, “Is your Giske at home today, Father?”

“Mercy, my Giske is at home,” said the man, who wanted to be rid of her.

“Well, then I can’t be his Giske,” she thought, and off she went. He was glad to see her go.

After she had walked a while, she came to a great forest, where she met two thieves. “I’ll join them,” thought Giske. “Since I’m the Devil, it might suit me nicely to be in a band of thieves.” But that was not what the thieves thought; as soon as they caught sight of Giske, they started running as fast as they could, for they believed the Evil One himself was after them. But that did them little good, for Giske had long legs and was quick on her feet. She was upon them before they knew what had happened.

“Are you going out to steal? Then I’ll come along and help you,” said Giske, “for I know this area well.”

When the thieves heard that, they thought she’d be useful company and stopped being afraid.

They intended to go steal a sheep, they said, but they did not know where to get one.

“Oh, that’s no problem,” said Giske. “I worked for a farmer in the woods here for a long time, and I could find the sheep-house even in pitch darkness.”

That sounded good to the thieves, and when they arrived there, Giske was supposed to go into the sheep-house and pass a sheep out, while the thieves stood ready to take it. The sheep-house was right up against the wall of the main house, where the farmer was sleeping, so Giske went in very softly and carefully. But once inside, she shouted out to the thieves, “Shall I take a ram or a ewe? There are plenty here to choose from!”

“Shh, shh! Just grab a nice fat one!” said the thieves.

“Yes, but do you want a ram or a ewe? A ram or a ewe? Because there are plenty to choose from,” shouted Giske.

“Shh, quiet down!” said the thieves. “Just grab a nice fat one, it doesn’t matter if it’s a ram or a ewe.”

“Yes, but do you want a ram or a ewe? A ram or a ewe? There are plenty here,” said Giske, sticking to her question.

“Plug your mouth, and just grab a nice fat one, whether it’s a ram or a ewe,” said the thieves.

Meanwhile, the farmer in the house woke up at all this shouting and came out in his nightshirt to see what was happening. The thieves took off immediately, and Giske ran after them so fast that she knocked the farmer flat on his back.

“Wait up, boys! Wait up!” she screamed.

The man, who saw nothing but this black creature rushing off, became so terrified he hardly dared stand up again, because he feared it was the Devil himself who had been in the sheep-house. He did not know what else to do, so he went in and woke his people and sat down with them to read from Scripture and pray, for he had heard that you could read the Devil away.

Then came the second evening. The thieves were heading out to steal a fat goose, and Giske was supposed to show them the way. When they reached the goose house, Giske was to go in and pass one out, since she knew the place well, and the thieves would stand ready to catch it.

“Do you want a goose or a gander? There’s plenty here!” Giske shouted when she got inside the goose house.

“Shh, shh! Just get one that’s good and heavy,” said the thieves.

“Yes, but do you want a goose or a gander? A goose or a gander? There’s plenty here!” Giske shouted.

“Shh, quiet! Just get a good heavy one, it doesn’t matter if it’s a goose or a gander, and keep your mouth shut,” they said.

While Giske and the thieves were arguing about this, one of the geese began to honk, then another joined in, and before long, they were all honking their heads off. Out came the farmer to see what was going on, and the thieves ran off as fast as they could, with Giske right behind them, so quickly that the farmer believed it was the black Devil himself—because she had long legs and no skirt to slow her down.

“Wait a bit, boys!” shouted Giske, “You could have had whatever you wanted, whether it was goose or gander!”

But they felt they had no time to stop, so they kept running. On that farm, and on the others they had been to, everyone began to read and pray, both young and old, for they were certain that the Devil himself had been there.

When it got to be the third evening, both the thieves and Giske were so hungry that they did not know what to do with themselves. So they decided to go to the storeroom of a wealthy farmer who lived by the forest’s edge and steal some food. Yes, off they went; but the thieves did not dare to go inside, so Giske was to enter the raised storehouse on stilts and pass food out, while they stood outside and took it.

When Giske went in, there was everything imaginable—meat, pork, sausages, and pea flatbread. The thieves hissed at her to just toss out something to eat, and remember what had happened the two previous evenings. But Giske stuck to her usual ways. “Do you want meat or pork or sausages or pea bread?” she shouted so loud that it echoed. “You can have whatever you want, because there’s plenty here, there’s plenty here!”

The farmer of that place had woken up at this carrying on and came out to see what was happening. The thieves ran off as fast as they could. Soon enough, Giske came running too, black and hideous as she was. “Wait, wait, boys!” she shouted. “You can have whatever you want, because there’s plenty here!” When the farmer caught sight of that horrific being, he too believed the Devil had been let loose, because he had heard what had happened the two previous evenings. He also started both reading and praying, and everyone in the entire district did the same, for they knew one could read the Devil away.

On Saturday evening, the thieves planned to steal another nice fat ram for the holiday meal, and they surely needed it, for they had starved for many days. But this time, they did not want Giske along. She did nothing but make a racket and cause trouble with her chatter, they said.

While Giske stood around waiting for them on Sunday morning, she got terribly hungry; she too had gone without much for three days. So she went into a turnip patch, pulled up a few turnips, and ate them. Meanwhile, the owner of that patch was so uneasy in his mind that he felt he absolutely had to go see his turnip patch on Sunday morning. Yes, he put on his trousers and headed down to the swampy area below the hill where the turnip patch lay. When he got there, he caught sight of something black rummaging around, pulling up turnips. He wasted no time in thinking it was the Devil. Away he hurried home as fast as he could, telling everyone the Devil was in the turnip patch. They were all greatly terrified on that farm when they heard it, and decided it was best to send for the pastor, to have him come and bind the Devil.

“No,” said the mistress of the house, “we can’t go to the pastor today, it’s Sunday morning. He won’t come now. He isn’t up so early, and even if he is, he’ll be working on his sermon.”

“Oh, I’ll promise him a big veal roast,” said the man, “then he’ll surely come.”

So off he went to the parsonage, but when he arrived, the pastor was not yet up. The maid asked the farmer to wait in the living room, then she went up to the pastor and said that this well-to-do farmer was downstairs and wanted to speak with him. The pastor, hearing that such a respectable man was waiting, pulled on his trousers, and came down at once in his slippers and nightcap.

The man told him the whole story—that the Devil was loose in his turnip patch—and that if the pastor would come bind him, he would be rewarded with a fat veal roast.

Well, the pastor was not unwilling, so he shouted for the boy to get the horse saddled while he got dressed.

“No, Father, that won’t do,” said the man. “The Devil may not stay in one place for long, and we can’t know where to catch him again if he gets away. You’d better come with me right now.”

The pastor followed just as he was, wearing his nightcap and slippers. But when they reached the swamp, it was so soggy that the pastor could not cross it in his slippers. The farmer hoisted him onto his back, intending to carry him over. He trod carefully on a stump here and a tuft of grass there; but when they were in the middle of the swamp, Giske spotted them. She thought the thieves were coming with a ram.

“Is it fat? Is it fat? Is it fat?” she shouted so loudly that it echoed through the forest.

“I don’t know, Devil take it, whether it’s fat or skinny,” cried the man when he heard this, “but if you want to find out, then come and feel for yourself!” And he was so frightened that he flung the pastor out into the middle of the bog and took off running, and if the pastor hasn’t made it out yet, he must still be lying there now.