Once upon a time there was a man named Gudbrand. He had a farm that lay far away on a hillside, and so people called him Gudbrand-on-the-Slope. He and his wife lived so well together, and were so perfectly agreed, that whatever the man did, his wife thought it was done so well it could never have been done better; however he went about things, she didn’t mind a bit. They owned their bit of land outright, they had a hundred dalers lying at the bottom of their chest, and in the byre they had two cows standing tethered.

But one day the wife said to Gudbrand, “I think we ought to go to town with one of the cows and sell it, so we can have a few coins in hand. We’re decent folk, and we ought to have some small change between our fingers like other people. Those hundred dalers at the bottom of the chest we can’t bring ourselves to break into, and I don’t know what we should do with more than one cow. And we’ll gain something too, because I’ll be spared the work of tending one cow instead of having to milk and water for two.”

Yes, Gudbrand thought that sounded both right and sensible. He took the cow at once and set off for town to sell it. But when he got to town there was no one who would buy the cow. Well, well, thought Gudbrand, then I can go home again with my cow. I know I’ve both a stall and a tether for her, and it’s just as far back as it was coming. And with that he started trudging home.

But when he’d gone a little way, he met a man who had a horse he meant to sell. Gudbrand thought it better to have a horse than a cow, and so he traded with him. After he’d walked a bit farther, he met a man driving a fat pig in front of him, and Gudbrand thought it better to have a fat pig than a horse, and traded with the man. He went on a little more; then he met a man with a goat, and Gudbrand thought it was surely better to have a goat than a pig, and so he traded for the goat. Then he walked a long way, until he met a man who had a sheep; with him he traded, because he thought: it’s always better to have a sheep than a goat. After he’d gone on for a while again, he met a man with a goose; so he traded away the sheep for the goose. And when he had gone a long, long stretch, he met a man with a rooster; with him he traded, because he thought to himself: it’s always better to have a rooster than a goose. He walked on until the day was far gone; but then he began to feel hungry, so he sold the rooster for twelve skillings and bought himself food with them—for it’s always better to save your life than to keep a rooster, thought Gudbrand-on-the-Slope.

So he went on toward home until he came to the nearest neighboring farm, and he went in. “How did it go for you in town?” the people asked.

“Oh, it went so-so,” said Gudbrand. “I can’t praise my luck, and I can’t blame it either,” and then he told them the whole story, how it had gone with him from first to last.

“Well, you’ll get a fine welcome when you come home to your wife!” said the man of the farm. “God help you—I wouldn’t want to be in your shoes.”

“I think it could have gone much worse,” said Gudbrand-on-the-Slope. “But whether it’s gone badly or well, I have such a clever wife that she never says a word, no matter how I go about things.”

“Yes, that I certainly know,” said the neighbor, “but even so I don’t believe it.”

“Shall we wager on it?” said Gudbrand-on-the-Slope. “I have a hundred dalers lying at home at the bottom of the chest—do you dare to stake the same against it?”

So they wagered, and Gudbrand stayed there until evening. When it began to grow dark, they went together to his farm. The neighbor was to stand outside the door and listen, while Gudbrand himself went in to his wife.

“Good evening,” said Gudbrand-on-the-Slope as he came in.

“Good evening,” said his wife. “Oh, thank God, you’re here!”

Yes, there he was.

Then she asked how it had gone for him in town.

“Oh, so-so,” answered Gudbrand. “It’s nothing much to boast of. When I got to town, no one would buy the cow, so I traded her for a horse.”

“Yes, you truly deserve thanks for that,” said his wife. “We’re decent folk, so we can drive to church as well as others, and if we can afford to keep a horse, then we might as well have one. Go down and put the horse in, children!”

“Well,” said Gudbrand, “I don’t have the horse either. When I’d gone a bit along the road, I traded it for a pig.”

“No, no!” cried his wife. “That was exactly what I would have done. You shall have my thanks for that, indeed! Now we can have bacon in the house, and something to offer people when they come to visit us as well. What did we need a horse for? Folks would only say we’d grown too grand to walk to church as we used to. Go down and put the pig in, children!”

“But I don’t have the pig here either,” said Gudbrand. “When I’d gone a bit farther, I traded it for a milking goat.”

“Oh no, oh no—how well you do everything!” cried his wife. “What did I need the pig for, now that I think of it? People would only say, ‘Over there they eat up everything they have.’ No, now I have a goat, and I’ll get both milk and cheese, and I’ll still have the goat afterward. Let the goat in, children!”

“No, I don’t have the goat either,” said Gudbrand. “When I’d gone a bit along the road, I traded the goat and got a fine sheep for it.”

“No!” cried his wife. “You’ve done it exactly as I could have wished—exactly as if I’d been along myself. What did we need the goat for? I’d have to scramble over hill and dale to fetch it home again every evening. No, if I have a sheep, I can get wool and clothes in the house, and food too. Go down and let the sheep in, children!”

“But I don’t have the sheep anymore,” said Gudbrand, “because after I’d walked for a while, I traded it for a goose.”

“Thank you for that,” said his wife, “and many thanks besides! What did I need the sheep for? I have neither spinning wheel nor distaff, and I don’t care to wear myself out making clothes either. We can buy clothes now as we always have. Now I’ll get goose meat, which I’ve long been craving, and now I can get down for my little pillow. Go down and let the goose in, children!”

“Yes, but I don’t have the goose either,” said Gudbrand. “When I’d come a bit farther along the road, I traded it for a rooster.”

“God knows how you manage to think of it all!” cried his wife. “It’s all just as I would have done myself. A rooster! That’s the same as if you’d bought an eight-day clock, for every morning the rooster crows at four o’clock, and then we can get up at the proper time. What did we need the goose for? I can’t even cook the goose meat properly, and my pillow I can fill with sedge grass. Go out and let the rooster in, children!”

“But I don’t have the rooster either,” said Gudbrand. “After I’d gone a bit farther, I got terribly hungry, and I had to sell the rooster for twelve skillings, to save my life.”

“Well, thank God you did!” cried his wife. “However you manage things, you do everything exactly as I could wish. What did we need the rooster for anyway? We’re our own masters—we can lie in as long as we like. Thank God, as long as I’ve got you back again, who manages everything so well, I need neither rooster nor goose, neither pigs nor cows.”

Then Gudbrand opened the door.

“Have I won the hundred dalers now?” he said, and the neighbor had to admit that he had.