Once upon a time, as the North Wind had instructed, the King stood on the steps of the palace. When the North Wind came howling and shaking the very walls of the castle, the prince stepped out to see what was happening. But the moment he did, the King grabbed him by the neck and threw him out. The North Wind then carried him away. Once rid of him, the King returned inside. At first, the Queen did not recognize him because he had become so gaunt and pale from his long journeys and sorrow. However, when he showed her the ring, she was overjoyed, and they had a grand wedding celebrated far and wide.

Some wives are like that. There was once a man and his wife who needed to sow seeds for planting, but they had neither seeds nor money to buy them. They owned just one cow, and the man was supposed to take it to town to sell it for seed money. However, the wife feared he would squander the money on drinks, so she decided to go herself, taking a hen along as well. Near the town, she met a butcher. "Are you selling that cow, ma'am?" he asked. "Yes, I am," she replied. "How much do you want for it?" "I’ll take a Mark for the cow, but the hen should cost ten dalers," she said. "I don’t need the hen, and you’ll surely sell it in town, but I’ll give you a Mark for the cow," he replied. 

She sold the cow for a Mark, but no one in town would give ten dalers for a scrawny hen. So she returned to the butcher and said, "I can't sell the hen, sir! You’ll have to take it like you did the cow." "We can sort that out," said the butcher, inviting her to his table and giving her food and so much liquor that she became drunk and lost all sense. While she slept it off, the butcher dipped her in a tar barrel and covered her with feathers.

When she woke up completely feathered, she was astounded and thought, "Is it me, or isn’t it me? No, it can’t be me; I must be some strange bird. But how will I know if it's really me?" she pondered. "Aha! I know how to tell if it's me: if the calves lick me and the dog doesn’t bark at me when I return home, then it's definitely me." But when the dog saw such a strange creature, it started barking fiercely as if robbers were about. "No, it can’t be me," she concluded. Going to the barn, the calves refused to lick her because they sensed the tar. "No, it’s not me, it must be some strange bird," she repeated, climbing onto the roof of the outhouse, trying to fly away like a bird.

When her husband saw her flapping her arms, he came out with a rifle, taking aim. "Oh, don’t shoot! Don’t shoot!" she cried, "It’s me." "If it’s you," he said, "don’t stand there like a fool, come down and explain yourself." She climbed down, but she had not a single penny left, for the Mark she'd received from the butcher she had squandered in drunkenness. Hearing this, her husband said, "You’re twice as foolish as ever," and he was so angry he threatened to leave and never return unless he found three other wives as foolish as her.

Off he went and, along the way, he saw a woman running in and out of a newly-built house with an empty sieve. Each time she entered, she covered the sieve with her apron as if she had something in it, and overturned it on the floor. "Why are you doing that, ma'am?" he asked. "Oh, I’m just trying to bring in some sunshine," she replied. "But I don’t know why it is: when I’m outside, I get the sun in the sieve, but by the time I'm inside, it’s gone. When I was in my old house, I had sunlight aplenty without carrying any in. If someone could bring me sunlight, I’d gladly give them three hundred dalers."

"Do you have an axe?" asked the man. "I can get you some sun." He took an axe and chopped windows into the house, as the builders had forgotten to add them. Immediately, sunlight flooded in, and he received his three hundred dalers. 

"That’s one," he thought, and continued his journey. After a while, he arrived at a house where he heard terrible screaming and yelling. Inside, he saw a woman beating her husband with a pounding stick. She had pulled a shirt over his head that had no hole for the neck. "Are you trying to kill your husband?" he asked. "No," she said, "I just want to make a neck hole in this shirt." The man screamed and protested, "Heaven help the one who gets a new shirt put on them like this! If someone could teach my wife to make a neck hole in a shirt differently, I’d gladly give them three hundred dalers." "I can do that with a pair of scissors," the man said. He took the scissors, cut the hole, and walk away with his money. 

"That’s two," he thought to himself. 

Eventually, he reached a farm and decided to rest. "Where are you from, sir?" asked the woman. "I’m from Ringerike," he replied. "Oh dear, are you from heaven? Then you must know my second husband, blessed Per!" The woman had been married three times; the first and last husbands were wicked, so she believed only her second husband had been blessed because he was kind. "Yes, I know him," the traveler said. "How is he doing?" she asked. "Oh, he's not well," the man replied, "he roams around with nothing to eat or wear — money’s out of the question." "God help him!" she cried. "He shouldn’t have to be in such a state. There is a loft full of clothes here that belonged to him and a chest of money too. If you take it to him, I’ll give you a horse and cart to carry it all; and he can use the horse there, and ride the cart around to avoid walking."

The man received a cartload of clothes, a chest full of silver coins, and plenty of food and drink. Once he had everything, he set off on his journey. 

“That’s three,” he thought. Meanwhile, the woman's third husband was out plowing the field. Seeing a stranger leaving with a horse and cart, he rushed back to the house and asked his wife who the man with their blue horse was. "Oh, him," she said, "that was someone from heaven. He said Per, my blessed second husband, is in a sorry state without clothes or money, so I sent all those old clothes and the chest of silver coins with him."

The husband quickly realized what was happening, saddled a horse, and rode off at full speed. It wasn’t long before he was close behind the man on the cart. But when the man noticed this, he quickly drove the cart into a small forest, ripping a handful of horsehair and tying it to a birch tree before lying down to stare at the sky.

“No, no, no!” he exclaimed to himself as the third husband rode up. “I’ve never seen anything like it!" The husband stood and watched, wondering if the man was mad. Finally, he asked, "What are you staring at?" "I’ve never seen the like!" replied the man. "There’s someone going straight to heaven with a blue horse. You can see the horsehair hanging in the birch, and up there in the clouds, you can see his blue horse." The husband looked at the sky and the birch. "I don’t see anything but the horsehair," he said. "No, you can’t see it from where you stand," the other reassured him. "Come here, lie down like me, and stare straight up at the sky. You mustn't look away, not even for a moment."

As Per Third laid there, gazing into the sky until his eyes watered, the traveler took the horse, mounted it, and rode off with the cartload. When the noise on the road alerted Per Third, he realized the man was escaping with his horse, but he was so dumbfounded that he didn’t give chase until it was too late.

Back home, completely tricked and empty-handed, he spun a tale for his wife. "I gave him the horse too," he said, "so Per, my blessed second husband, wouldn't have to ride around heaven's farm roads in an old cart. Now he can sell the cart and buy a proper coach." "Thank you! I never thought you were such a kind man," answered his wife.

When the smart man from Ringerike who had gathered six hundred dalers and a cartload of clothes and money returned home, he found all the fields plowed and sown. The first thing he asked his wife was where she got the seed corn from. "Oh," she replied, "I always heard that those who sow something, something they shall have, so I sowed the salt the travelers left here. If it rains soon, I believe it might grow well." "You’re mad, and you’ll be mad as long as you live," he declared. "But that doesn't matter, for the others are just as foolish as you."

Each prefers their own children. Once, a huntsman was out in the woods and met a snipe. “Dear, please don’t shoot my children!” pleaded the snipe. “Which ones are your children?” asked the huntsman. “The most beautiful children in the woods are mine!” replied the snipe. “Then I won’t shoot them,” promised the huntsman.

Yet, when he returned, he held a bundle of young snipes in hand. “Oh no! Why did you shoot my children anyway?” cried the snipe. “Were these yours?” asked the huntsman. “I shot the ugliest I found.” “Ah yes!” the snipe replied, “don’t you know, everyone thinks their own children are best?”