Once upon a time, there was a boy who set out to seek marriage. Among the places he visited was a farm where the people lived in dire poverty and destitution. However, when the suitor arrived, they intended to appear well-off, as one might expect. The man had gotten a new sleeve for his jacket. "Sit down!" he said to the suitor. "But it's so dusty everywhere!" and he went around rubbing and wiping the benches and tables with his new jacket sleeve, while he kept his other arm behind his back. The wife had received a new shoe, so she walked around kicking everything, the stools and chairs; "There’s so much in the way, it’s so untidy here!" she said. Then they called for their daughter to come and tidy up. She had gotten a new cap, and she poked her head through the door and nodded here and there. "I can’t be everywhere at once!" she said. Truly, this was a well-to-do family the suitor had come to.

Once upon a time, there was a poor man who lived in a cabin far away in the forest and made a living by hunting. He had one daughter, and she was both beautiful and kind. When the mother died early, and the girl grew half-grown, she said she wanted to go to people so she could learn to earn her own bread too. "Yes, my daughter," said the father, "you haven’t learned anything here with me but how to pluck birds and cook, but you will have to try and earn your bread anyhow." So the girl went out to seek employment, and after walking a while, she came to the royal court. She stayed there, and the queen took such a liking to her that the other maids became quite jealous. They went so far as to tell the queen that the girl had claimed she could spin a pound of flax in twenty-four hours, for the queen was very fond of all kinds of handiwork. “Yes, if you said that, you must do it,” said the queen to her; “but you may have a little more time if needed.” The girl, poor thing, didn’t dare say she had never spun before, and just asked for a room to herself; she received one, and there the spinning wheel and flax were brought in. She sat there crying, in distress, not knowing what to do; she fiddled with the wheel, turning it this way and that, not knowing how to handle it—she had never even seen a spinning wheel before. But as she sat there, an old woman came in to her. "What ails you, my child?" she asked. "Oh," replied the girl, "it wouldn't help to tell you; you can't help me anyway!" "That no one knows," said the woman. "Perhaps I can help you nevertheless." Well, I might as well tell her, thought the girl, and so she explained how her fellow maids had spread the word that she had boasted about spinning a pound of flax in twenty-four hours, “and poor me,” she said, “I have never in my life seen a spinning wheel, let alone spin so much in a day.” "That doesn’t matter, child," said the woman, "if you promise to call me auntie on your day of honor, I will spin for you, and you can go take a nap." Yes, the girl readily agreed to that, and went off to lie down. In the morning, when she woke up, all the flax was spun and lay neatly on the table, looking so fine and even that nobody had ever seen such beautiful yarn. The queen was very pleased with the fine yarn and grew even fonder of the girl than before. But this made the others even more envious, so they thought up something else: they told the queen that now she had claimed she could weave the spun yarn into cloth in twenty-four hours. The queen once again said that if she had claimed it, she must do it, but she could have a bit more time. Again, the girl didn’t dare say no, and asked for a private room to try it out. She again sat there crying, not knowing what to do, until another old woman came in and asked, "What ails you, my child?" The girl was reluctant to tell at first, but finally, she did explain why she was so upset. "It doesn't matter, if you promise to call me auntie on your day of honor, I will weave for you, so you can go take a nap," said the woman. The girl gladly agreed and went to lie down. When she awoke, the cloth lay finished on the table, woven so finely and tightly as could be. She took the cloth to the queen, who was overjoyed with the beautiful work and cherished the girl even more. But this kindness made the others even more envious, and they kept plotting until they finally told the queen that now the girl had claimed she could sew the woven fabric into shirts in twenty-three hours. Just as before, the girl didn’t dare admit she couldn’t sew, so she got a private room and sat crying, filled with worry. Then another old woman came to her, promising to sew for her in exchange for being called auntie on the girl’s day of honor. The girl promised, went to lie down, and when she awoke, found the fabric sewn into shirts lying on the table. The seam was more beautiful than anyone had ever seen, and the shirts had names and were completely ready. The queen, upon seeing the work, was so thrilled with the stitching that she clapped her hands and said, “I have never owned or seen such beautiful seamwork,” and she loved the girl as much as her own daughter. “If you want to, you may have the prince,” she said to the girl, “since you’ll never need to hire anything done; you can sew and spin and weave all yourself.” As the girl was beautiful and the prince liked her, they quickly arranged a wedding. But just as the prince had seated himself at the bridal table with her, an old ugly woman with a long nose—three ells long, at least—entered. The bride rose and curtsied, saying, “Good day, Auntie!” “Is this my bride’s aunt?” the prince asked. Yes, she was indeed. “Well, she ought to sit at the table then,” said the prince, though he and the others thought she was dreadful table company. No sooner had she sat down than another old ugly woman appeared, with a back so broad and thick she could barely squeeze through the door. The bride immediately got up and greeted, “Good day, Auntie!” The prince asked again if this was his bride’s aunt. Both confirmed, and the prince said that if so, she ought to sit at the table too. But just as she had settled, another old ugly woman arrived, with eyes so large as plates, so red and weeping it was ghastly to look at. The bride stood again and greeted, “Good day, Auntie!” and the prince invited her to the table as well; but he wasn’t pleased and thought to himself, “God help me, what kind of aunts does my bride have?” After some time, he couldn’t hold back and asked, “But how on earth can my bride, who is so lovely, have such hideous and misshapen aunts?” “I can tell you,” said one. “I was just as pretty as your bride when I was her age; but this long nose of mine is due to constantly nodding and leaning over spinning, which stretched my nose to its current length.” “And I,” said the second aunt, “ever since I was young, have rocked back and forth at the loom, and that's why my back is as large and swollen as you now see.” Then the third spoke: “Since I was very little, I’ve sat staring and sewing day and night; that’s why my eyes are so terrible and red, and nothing can be done about them now.” “Well, then,” said the prince, “I’m glad to know that; for if such work makes people so ugly and dreadful, then my bride will never spin, weave, or sew a stitch again in her life!”