"No," said Herreper, "I will not do that at all."

"Yes, you will," replied the Cat, "or else I'll scratch your eyes out."

So Herreper had to do it, as much as he didn't want to: he chopped off the Cat's head. At that moment, she transformed into the most beautiful Princess anyone had ever seen, and Herreper was completely captivated by her.

"This splendor was once mine," said the Princess, "but the Troll cast a spell on me, turning me into a Cat in your parents' home. Now you may choose whether you wish to take me as your Queen or not; since then, you are the King of the entire realm," said the Princess.

Oh yes, it's quite possible that Herreper wanted her to be his Queen. So there was a wedding and a feast lasting eight days, and I wasn't with Herreper and his Queen any longer.

Once upon a time, there was a King who had so many geese that he needed a girl just to herd them; her name was Aase, and so they called her Aase the Goose Girl.

Now, there was a Prince from England who was out seeking a bride; Aase stood in his way.

"Are you sitting there, little Aase?" said the Prince.

"Yes, I'm sitting here, patching and mending, waiting for the Prince from England today," said little Aase.

"You can't expect to get him," said the Prince.

"Oh, if I'm meant to have him, then I'll have him," said little Aase.

Painters were sent to all the lands and kingdoms to capture images of the most beautiful princesses; the Prince wanted to choose from among them. He liked one so much that he traveled after her and wanted to marry her, and he was both happy and blissful when she became his betrothed. However, the Prince had a stone with him, which he placed in front of his bed, and it knew everything; when the Princess came, Aase the Goose Girl told her that if she had any past lover or any secrets she did not want the Prince to know, she mustn't step over the stone lying in front of his bed, "for it will reveal everything about you," she said. Hearing this, the Princess became very worried, but then she came up with the idea of asking Aase to go in her place and lie with the Prince in the evening. Once he fell asleep, they would switch back so that the real one would be with him when morning came.

And so they did.

When Aase the Goose Girl came and stepped onto the stone, the Prince asked, "Who is it that gets into my bed?"

"A pure and chaste maiden!" said the stone, and they lay down to sleep. But as the night wore on, the Princess returned and took Aase's place.

In the morning, when they got up, the Prince asked the stone again, "Who is it that gets out of my bed?"

"One who has had three lovers," the stone replied.

When the Prince heard that, he did not want her; you can imagine that, and so he sent her home again and chose another betrothed instead.

When he went to see her, little Aase the Goose Girl stood in his way again.

"Are you sitting there, little Aase the Goose Girl?" said the Prince.

"Yes, I'm sitting here, patching and mending, waiting for the Prince from England today," said Aase.

"You can't expect to get him," said the Prince.

"Oh, if I'm meant to have him, then I'll have him," said little Aase.

With this Princess, it happened exactly the same way as with the first one, except that when she got up in the morning, the stone said she had six. So the Prince didn’t want her either and dismissed her; but one more time, he decided to try his luck, hoping to find someone who was pure and chaste. So he searched far and wide again in many lands, until he found one he liked.

When he was on his way to her, little Aase the Goose Girl stopped him once more.

"Are you sitting there, little Aase the Goose Girl?" asked the Prince.

"Yes, I'm sitting here, patching and mending, waiting for the Prince from England today," said Aase.

"You can't expect to get him," said the Prince.

"Oh yes, if I'm meant to have him, I'll have him," said little Aase.

When the Princess arrived, Aase the Goose Girl gave her the same warning she had given the previous two: if she had had any lovers or secrets she didn't want the Prince to know, she must not step on the stone he had placed by his bed, "for it reveals everything," she said. The Princess was dismayed to hear this, but she was just as much a fool as the others and asked Aase to go in her place and lie with the Prince in the evening, switching back once he fell asleep so that the real one would be with him come morning.

And so they did.

When little Aase the Goose Girl came and stepped on the stone, the Prince asked, "Who is it that gets into my bed?"

"A pure and chaste maiden!" said the stone, and they lay down.

During the night, the Prince slipped a ring onto Aase's finger, it was so tight it couldn't come off again. The Prince had a sense that something was amiss, so he wanted a mark by which he could recognize who was truly the right one. After the Prince fell asleep, the Princess came and sent Aase to the goose coop and took her place in the bed.

In the morning, when they rose, the Prince asked, "Who is it that gets out of my bed?"

"One who has had nine," said the stone, and the Prince flew into such a rage that he sent her away immediately. Then he asked the stone how these Princesses could have set foot on it without his knowing, for he couldn't understand it, he said. The stone recounted how they had tricked him and sent Aase the Goose Girl in their place. The Prince wanted to get to the bottom of this: he went down to her, where she was herding her geese, to see if she indeed had the ring; if she did, it would be best to take her as Queen, he thought. When he arrived, he saw that she had wrapped a rag around one of her fingers, so he asked why she had done that. "Oh, I've cut myself so badly," said little Aase the Goose Girl. He wanted to look at the finger, but Aase didn't want to remove the rag. Then the Prince grabbed the finger, Aase tried to pull it away; the rag came off, and he recognized his ring. So he took her with him to the King's castle, adorned her in clothes and splendor, and they were married, and thus little Aase the Goose Girl got the Prince of England, simply because she was meant to have him.