Once upon a time, there was an old woman who had a son. As she was frail and weak, the boy, her son, had to go to the storeroom to get some porridge flour for lunch. But when he stepped out onto the storeroom stairs, the north wind came blowing in, snatched the flour from him, and whisked it away into the air. The boy went back for more, but as soon as he stepped onto the stairs again, the north wind came blowing and took the flour from him once more, and the same thing happened a third time. This made the boy quite angry, and he thought it unreasonable that the north wind should carry on like this, so he decided to track it down and demand the flour back.

So, off he went; the road was long, and he walked and walked until eventually, he came to the north wind.

“Good day,” said the boy, “and thanks for last time.”

“Good day,” replied the north wind — his voice was gruff — “and thanks yourself. What do you want?” he asked.

“Oh,” said the boy, “I wanted to ask you kindly to return the flour you took from me on the storeroom stairs; we have very little, and if you keep taking the little we have, we'll have nothing but starving.”

“I don't have any flour,” said the north wind, “but since you're in such need, you can have a cloth that will give you anything you wish for just by saying: ‘Cloth, spread yourself and serve all kinds of exquisite dishes!’”

The boy was quite satisfied with this. But since the road was so long that he couldn’t get home that day, he stopped at an inn along the way, and when those present were about to eat supper, he laid the cloth on a table in the corner and said, “Cloth, spread yourself and serve all kinds of exquisite dishes!” No sooner had he said it than the cloth did as commanded, and everyone thought it was a marvelous thing; but none liked it more than the innkeeper’s wife. She thought it would save a lot of trouble with roasting, cooking, setting tables and serving dishes on that table. So, later in the night, when everyone was asleep, she took the boy’s cloth and replaced it with another one, identical to the one he’d gotten from the north wind, but which couldn’t even spread out some oatcakes.

When the boy woke up, he took his cloth and continued on his way, reaching home to his mother that day.

“Well,” he said, “I’ve been to the north wind; he’s a decent fellow, as he gave me this cloth, and whenever I tell it: ‘Cloth, spread yourself and serve all kinds of exquisite dishes!’ it gives me all the food I could wish for.”

“Yes, I know that,” said the mother, “but I won't believe it until I see it.”

The boy hurried to set up a table, laid the cloth on it, and said: “Cloth, spread yourself and serve all kinds of exquisite dishes!” but the cloth didn’t even spread out a piece of flatbread.

“There’s no other recourse but to go to the north wind again,” said the boy, and he set out once more. By the afternoon, he reached where the north wind lived.

“Good evening,” said the boy.

“Good evening,” said the north wind.

“I came to demand justice for the flour you took from me,” said the boy; “because the cloth you gave me was no good.”

“I don’t have any flour,” said the north wind, “but here you have a goat that makes gold coins whenever you say: ‘My goat, make money!’”

The boy liked the idea; but since it was such a long way home that he couldn’t reach there that day, he took night shelter at the inn again. Before he asked for anything, he tested the goat, as he wanted to see if what the north wind had said was true, and indeed it was; but when the innkeeper saw this, he thought it was a splendid goat, and once the boy had fallen asleep, he swapped it with another that certainly didn’t make gold coins.

The next morning, the boy set out, and when he reached home to his mother, he said: “The north wind is a kind man, after all; now he’s given me a goat that can make gold coins just by saying: ‘My goat, make money!’”

“I know that,” said the mother, “that’s nothing but talk, and I won’t believe it until I see it.”

“My goat, make money!” said the boy; but the goat did not make money.

So, he went back to the north wind and told him that the goat was no good, and that he still wanted justice for the flour.

“Well, now I have nothing else to give you,” said the north wind, “except that old stick standing in the corner; but it's such that when you say: ‘My stick, strike on!’ it will strike until you say: ‘My stick, stop still!’”

Since the road was long, the boy once again stopped at the inn for the night; but having guessed what had happened with the cloth and the goat, he pretended to snore loudly on the bench and acted as if he was asleep. The innkeeper, who could also sense that the stick was worth something, fetched one that looked identical, intending to swap it when he heard the boy snoring; but the moment the innkeeper was about to take the stick, the boy shouted: “My stick, strike on!” and the stick started beating the innkeeper so that he jumped over both tables and benches, crying and pleading: “Oh Lord! oh Lord! make the stick stop, or it’ll kill me; you shall have both your cloth and your goat back.” When the boy thought the innkeeper had had enough, he said: “My stick, stop still,” took the cloth and put it in his pocket, held the stick in his hand, tied a rope around the goat’s horns, and went home with everything. That was fair recompense for the flour!