Once upon a time, there was a man who set out on a journey to court a bride, and he was so audacious that he wanted the king's daughter. He had heard from both home and on his travels that she was so fair and beautiful that no one looked like her. He traveled for a long time and met no one, nor did he see anyone the entire day. But towards evening, he came upon a hill and saw three sorcerers working on a new silk garment. "Good evening," said the man. "Good evening again," replied the sorcerers. "Where to?" they asked. "I intend to visit the king and woo his daughter," said the man. "You can rest here for the night," they said. Well, the man gratefully accepted the offer. "We can accompany you part of the way tomorrow," they said. "Yes, I'd like that," the man replied. As it was getting later in the evening, all three men set off until they came to a cottage. "Is anyone home here?" asked the man. "Yes, there is," they replied and went inside. But upon entering, there was nothing to see except an old woman sitting by the kitchen with an iron pot, cooking porridge, and some old, half-broken sticks leaning against the wall. 

"Good evening, good evening," she said. "Would you like to stay for the night?" "Yes, if we could," said the sorcerers. They decided to make themselves comfortable and take a short nap. Olle began, "No, this won't do." So a little negotiation followed, repeated several times. "You'll have to wait until tomorrow," she said. "Oh, how wonderful it would be if things could be done right away," said the man. "What are you saying?" asked the women, smiling. The man lay down, wiping tears from his face. "What do you want?" he asked. "Well, we desire a joyous company," they said. The group then went outside and traveled on their own. On the way, they saw a burning road sign. It didn't exactly lead anywhere, but wow, they thought, here lies a sign. They continued on until they met a woman pushing a wheelbarrow. She was so easily startled that she threw a panicked fit and ran straight into a cliff as soon as the men came near. 

"What is going on here?" asked the man. "Just a lone woman," said the sorcerers. Nearby lay the overturned wheelbarrow. "Look at this," said the man, finding it quite used. "You?" they asked. "I am on my way to the king's daughter," she replied. They continued on their way together. "But before we reach the city," they said, "let us speak in the language of our ancestors, for those without small shields and sweet voices are dear to us.” The closer they got, the more anxious the man became. "Are we in need?" he asked. "It seems like we need some regality or a gloss for the spring for my father," he said. "Only your gown," replied the men. They departed, and the trees echoed, "Tell us when you will return to us in jubilation?" "But," he said, "once given the chance, the spirit, never to begin again, I say: 'Come back soon.' The farther along, the shorter the way back." Now they leapt over the troll's mouth, and the next meeting took place on an open field. 

"I will gallantly fell the tree," said the shooter to them: "come now and lend a helping hand." They were happy to do so and freed the enchanted woods. They prepared all the knotted ropes: "Let's leave them hanging now." Here, many sources flow through such a large network that one of the fat circlers must fly out through the turf and down. "How will you work?" they asked. "Everywhere," he replied. So the man cast that ahead. Rhönpojken waited waitingly at her father's hut and kept vigil. He received the sphere in hand. He then returned to her helper, who looked up somberly and waited for the planks to be surrounded. They resorted to a divine-like matter and took a beam to get there. That wisdom she could not overcome, but went possibly due to timber cladding. What was English? he asked: "I would have been crazy before," he asked. The next day, the herald announced, proclaiming the price he himself had spoken of. Then the giants ventured their voice and took the oath again and befared. "Everywhere attraction," so when redemption might happen. Wild goats were cut in half and many from the marcher's feast day.