Once upon a time there was a poor, poor widow who had only one son. She scrimped and slaved to keep him until he had been confirmed. Then she sat him down.

“I can’t feed you any longer,” she said. “You’ll have to go out and earn your own bread.”

So the widow’s son set off into the world. When he had been walking for a day or so, he met a stranger on the road.

“Where are you off to?” asked the man.

“Out into the world, to find work,” said the boy.

“Will you come and work for me?”

“Oh, yes. I’d as soon work for you as for anybody.”

“You’ll have an easy time of it with me,” said the man. “All you need do is keep me company. You won’t have to lift a finger.”

So the boy went home with him. He ate well and drank well and had next to nothing to do. But in all the time he was there, he never saw another living soul in that house.

One day the man said, “I’m going away for eight days. You’ll be on your own here, and you’re not to go into any of these four rooms. If you do, I’ll kill you when I get back.”

No, said the boy, he wouldn’t dream of it.

But when the man had been gone three or four days, the boy couldn’t stand it any longer, and he went into the first room. He looked all round. There was nothing in there, nothing at all, except a shelf high above the door, and on the shelf lay a whip of thorny briar. The boy stood on tiptoe and reached up toward it. Then he thought better of it and let his hand fall.

“Well, that was hardly worth forbidding,” he thought.

When the eight days were up, the man came home.

“You haven’t been in any of the rooms, I suppose?” he said.

“No, not me,” said the boy.

“I’ll soon see about that,” said the man, and he walked straight into the room the boy had been in. “Oh, yes, you’ve been in here all right,” he said. “And now you’ll lose your life.”

The boy wept and begged, and in the end he was let off with his life. But he got a thrashing he wouldn’t forget. And when it was over, they were the best of friends again.

Some time later the man set off on another journey. This time he would be gone a fortnight, and before he left, he told the boy not to set foot in any room he hadn’t been in already. The one he had been in, he was welcome to visit as often as he liked.

It went just the same as before, except that this time the boy held out for eight days. The second room was just as bare: only a shelf above the door, and on it a great round stone and a water jug.

“Well, that was hardly worth being so scared of, either,” he thought.

When the man came home, he asked whether the boy had been in any of the rooms. No, of course not. Whatever gave him that idea?

“I’ll soon see about that,” said the man. And when he saw that the boy had been in there after all, he said, “Now I won’t spare you any longer. Now you’ll lose your life!”

But the boy wept and begged once more, and once more he got off with a beating, though this time it was as big a beating as there was room for on him. When he had healed, he lived as comfortably as ever, and he and the man were the best of friends.

After a while the man was going away for three weeks, and he told the boy that if he went into the third room, there would be no more talk of sparing his life. When a fortnight had passed, the boy couldn’t help himself. He slipped in. There was nothing inside at all except a trapdoor in the floor. He lifted it and looked down, and there below stood a great copper cauldron, bubbling and boiling away, though he couldn’t see any fire under it.

“I’d just like to know if that’s hot,” thought the boy, and he dipped in his finger. When he pulled it out again, it was gilded all over.

He scraped it and scrubbed it, but the gold wouldn’t come off, so he tied a rag round it.

“What’s wrong with your finger?” asked the man when he came home.

“I cut it,” said the boy. “Badly.”

The man tore off the rag, and then he could see well enough what was wrong. At first he meant to kill the boy outright. But the boy wept and begged again, and the man only beat him, though so hard that the boy lay in bed for three days. Then the man took a jar down from the wall and rubbed him with what was in it, and the boy was as right as rain.

A while after that, the man was off again, and this time he wouldn’t be back for a month. Before he went, he told the boy that if he set foot in the fourth room, he could give up all hope of keeping his life.

For two or three weeks the boy kept away. Then he couldn’t bear it. He had to go in, he simply had to, and in he slipped.

There stood a great black horse, tied up in a stall. At its head was a trough of glowing coals, and at its tail a basket of hay.

“That’s the wrong way round,” thought the boy. So he swapped them over, dragging the hay basket up to the horse’s head.

Then the horse spoke.

“You’ve a kind heart, to give me food,” it said, “and for that I’ll save you. If the troll comes home now and finds you, he’ll kill you.”

“The troll?” said the boy.

“The troll,” said the horse. “Now listen. Go up to the room right above this one. There’s armour hanging there. Don’t take any of the bright ones, whatever you do. Take the rustiest you can find. Choose your sword and saddle the same way.”

The boy did as he was told, though it was a heavy load to carry.

When he came back, the horse told him to strip, climb down into the cauldron that was boiling in the other room, and give himself a good wash.

“I’ll come out gilded like a weathercock,” thought the boy. But he did it all the same.

He didn’t come out gilded. He came out so handsome and fine, with skin as white as milk and cheeks as red as blood, and far stronger than before.

“Do you feel any different?” asked the horse.

“Yes,” said the boy.

“Try lifting me.”

Oh, yes, he could do that. And the sword he swung as lightly as a twig.

“Now put the saddle on me,” said the horse, “and the armour on yourself. Then take the briar whip and the stone and the water jug and the jar of ointment, and we’ll be off.”

The moment the boy was up on the horse’s back, away they went, so fast that he never knew how they got anywhere.

When they had ridden a while, the horse said, “I think I hear a rumbling. Look round. Can you see anything?”

“There’s lots and lots of them coming after us,” said the boy. “Twenty at least.”

“That’s the troll,” said the horse. “Now he’s coming with his folk.”

They rode on until the ones behind them began to gain.

“Throw the briar whip back over your shoulder,” said the horse. “But throw it hard, and far away from me!”

The boy threw it, and at once a huge, dense briar forest sprang up behind them. So the boy rode on a long, long way, while the troll had to go home for something to hack his way through with.

After a while the horse said, “Look back. Can you see anything now?”

“Yes, a whole crowd,” said the boy, “like a congregation coming out of church.”

“That’s the troll,” said the horse. “Now he’s got more of them with him. Throw the stone! But throw it hard, and far away from me!”

As soon as the boy did as the horse said, a great, great mountain of boulders rose up behind them. So the troll had to go home for something to break his way through the mountain with, and while he was at it, the boy rode on a good long way.

Then the horse told him to look back once more, and this time the boy saw them swarming like a whole army, so bright that they glittered.

“That’s the troll,” said the horse. “Now he’s got every last one of them with him. Empty the water jug out behind you. But mind you don’t spill a drop on me!”

The boy did, but somehow or other he spilled a few drops on the horse’s rump. A great, great lake spread out behind them, and because of those few drops the horse found itself standing far out in the water. Still, it swam to land. When the trolls reached the lake, they lay down to drink it dry, and they slurped and they gulped until they burst.

“Now we’re rid of them,” said the horse.

After they had travelled a long, long way, they came to a green meadow in a forest.

“Now take off all the armour and put on your own ragged clothes,” said the horse. “Take the saddle off me and let me go, and hang everything up inside this big hollow linden tree. Then make yourself a wig out of the grey lichen that hangs from the spruces, and go up to the King’s manor. It’s close by. Ask for work there. And whenever you need me, just come here and rattle the bridle, and I’ll come to you.”

The boy did as the horse said. Once he had the lichen wig on, he looked so wretched and pale and scruffy that nobody would have known him. He went up to the King’s manor and asked first if he could work in the kitchen, carrying wood and water for the cook.

But the kitchen maid said, “Why are you wearing that horrible wig? Take it off. I won’t have anybody that ugly in here.”

“I can’t,” said the boy. “My head isn’t quite clean.”

“And you think I want you near the food, the state you’re in?” said the cook. “Go down to the Master of the Stables. You’re more fit for mucking out.”

But when the Master of the Stables told him to take off the wig, he got the same answer, and he wouldn’t have him either.

“Go to the head gardener,” he said. “You’re best fit for grubbing in the dirt.”

The head gardener let him stay. But none of the other servants would share a room with him, so he had to sleep on his own under the steps of the summerhouse. It stood up on posts, with a tall flight of stairs, and underneath they gave him a little moss for a bed. There he lay as best he could.

He had been at the manor for some time when, one morning just as the sun was rising, he took off the lichen wig to wash at the stone basin under the pump. And without it he was so handsome that it was a joy to look at him.

The Princess saw the garden boy from her window, and she thought she had never seen anyone so handsome in all her life. She went to the head gardener and asked why the boy slept out under the steps.

“Oh, none of the other servants will have him,” said the head gardener.

“Then let him come up tonight and sleep just inside my door,” said the Princess. “After that they won’t think themselves too good to have him under their roof.”

The head gardener told the boy.

“Do you think I’d do that?” said the boy. “They’d say there was something between me and the Princess.”

“Oh, yes, you’ve good reason to be afraid of that,” said the head gardener, “handsome as you are.”

“Oh, all right,” said the boy. “If you say I must, I suppose I must.”

When he went up the stairs that evening, he stamped and clumped so loudly that they had to beg him to walk softly, or the King would hear of it. He came in and lay down and started snoring at once. Then the Princess said to her maid, “Creep over and pull that lichen wig off him.”

The maid crept over. But just as she went to snatch it, the boy clapped both hands on it and said she wasn’t having it, not on any account. Then he lay back down and went on snoring. The Princess gave the maid another nod, and this time she whipped the wig off. And there lay the boy, fair and rosy, just as the Princess had seen him in the morning sun.

After that, the boy slept in the Princess’s room every night.

But it wasn’t long before the King heard that the garden boy was sleeping in his daughter’s room, and he was so furious that he very nearly had him put to death. He didn’t, in the end. Instead he threw him into the prison tower, and he locked the Princess in her room and wouldn’t let her out, by day or by night. However much she wept and begged for herself and for the boy, it did no good. It only made the King angrier.

Some time later war came to the land. Another king wanted to take the kingdom, and the King had to arm himself against him. When the boy heard about it, he called for the jailer.

“Go to the King for me,” he said, “and ask him for armour and a sword, and leave to go to the war.”

Everybody laughed when the jailer gave his message, and they begged the King to let the boy have some old junk for armour, so they could have the fun of watching the poor wretch go to war. So he got it, and a broken-down old nag besides, which hobbled along on three legs and dragged the fourth behind it.

Then they rode out against the enemy. But they hadn’t got far from the manor before the boy was stuck fast in a bog, nag and all. There he sat, rocking and jerking in the saddle.

“Hey, up you get!” he said to the nag. “Hey, up you get!”

The others thought it was the best fun they’d had in years, and they laughed and jeered at him as they rode by. But the moment they were out of sight, he ran to the linden tree, put on the armour and rattled the bridle. At once the horse was there.

“You do your best,” it said, “and I’ll do mine!”

By the time the boy reached the battle, it had already begun, and the King was in a bad way. But in no time at all the boy had chased the enemy a long, long way off.

The King and his men wondered and wondered who it could be that had come to help them. But nobody got close enough to speak to him, and when the battle was over, he was gone. When they rode home, there sat the boy in the bog, still rocking and jerking on his three-legged nag, and they laughed all over again.

“Would you look at that!” they said. “The fool’s still sitting there!”

The next day, when they rode out, he was still sitting there, and again they laughed and jeered. But no sooner had they gone by than he ran to the linden tree, and everything went just as it had the day before. They all wondered who the strange champion could be, but nobody got near enough to speak to him. And nobody guessed it was the boy, that goes without saying.

That evening, as they rode home and saw him still sitting on his nag, they laughed at him again, and one of them shot an arrow at him and hit him in the leg. The boy screamed and carried on so dreadfully that the King threw him his own handkerchief.

“Tie that round it,” he said, “and stop that racket.”

The third morning, when they rode out, there he sat in the bog again.

“Hey, up you get!” he said to the nag. “Hey, up you get!”

“No, no,” said the King’s men as they rode by. “He’ll sit there till he starves to death.” And they laughed so hard they nearly fell off their horses.

As soon as they were gone, he ran to the linden tree again, and he reached the battle just when he was needed most. That day he killed the enemy king, and the war was over then and there.

When the fighting was done, the King caught sight of his own handkerchief, tied round the strange champion’s leg, and after that he had no trouble telling who he was. They brought the boy home to the manor with great rejoicing, and the Princess saw him from her window and was so happy you would hardly believe it.

“And there’s my sweetheart with them!” she said.

Then the boy took out the jar of ointment and rubbed it on his own leg, and after that on all the wounded, and every one of them was well again in the blink of an eye.

So he got the Princess, and since the King saw no reason to wait, the wedding was set for the very next day. But on the morning of the wedding, when the boy went down to the stable to see the horse, it stood there with its head low and its ears drooping, and it wouldn’t touch its food.

“What’s the matter?” asked the young king, for a king was what he had become, with half the kingdom to his name.

“I’ve helped you on in the world,” said the horse, “and now I don’t want to live any longer. Take your sword and cut off my head.”

“No, I won’t do that,” said the young king. “You shall have whatever you want, and never do another day’s work as long as you live.”

“If you don’t do as I say,” said the horse, “I’ll find a way to take your life.”

So he had to do it. But when he raised the sword, he felt so wretched that he had to turn his face away, because he couldn’t bear to see the blow fall. And the moment the head was off, there stood the handsomest prince you ever saw, right where the horse had been. The halter lay cut through in the straw.

“Where in all the world did you come from?” asked the young king.

“I was the horse,” said the prince. “I used to be king of the country that king came from, the one you killed in the battle yesterday. It was he who bewitched me into a horse and sold me to the troll. Now that he’s dead, I’ll have my kingdom back, and you and I will be neighbouring kings. But we shall never go to war with each other.”

And they never did. They were friends as long as they lived, and they were forever riding over to visit each other.