Once upon a time, there was a Queen who was out driving; it was winter, and fresh snow had just fallen. As she traveled a bit down the road, she began to have a nosebleed and had to step out of the sleigh. While she stood by the fence and looked at the red blood on the white snow, she thought about how she had twelve sons and no daughter, and she said to herself: “If only I had a daughter as white as snow and as red as blood, I wouldn't mind about my sons.” Hardly had she spoken, when a sorceress appeared before her. “You shall have a daughter,” said the witch, “and she shall be as white as snow and as red as blood, and then your sons shall be mine; but you can keep them until the child is baptized.” When the time came, the Queen gave birth to a daughter, and she was as white as snow and as red as blood, exactly as the witch had promised, so they named her Snow White and Rose Red. There was great joy in the royal court, and the Queen was overjoyed beyond measure; but when she remembered what she had promised to the witch, she had a silversmith make twelve silver spoons, one for each prince, and then she had him make one more, which she gave to Snow White and Rose Red. As soon as the princess was baptized, the princes were transformed into twelve wild ducks and flew away, never to be seen again; they were gone and remained missing. The princess grew up to become both tall and beautiful, but she was often so strangely sad, and no one could figure out what was wrong with her. One evening the Queen was also so sorrowful, for she had many strange thoughts whenever she thought about her sons; so, she said to Snow White and Rose Red, "Why are you so sad, my child? If something is troubling you, let me know! If there is something you want, you shall have it." “Oh, I just feel so lonely,” said Snow White and Rose Red; “everyone else has siblings, but I am so alone, I have none; that is what makes me sorrowful.” “You had siblings too, my child,” said the Queen, “I had twelve sons, who were your brothers, but I gave them all away to have you,” she said, and then she told her the whole story. When the princess heard this, she couldn't rest; no matter how much the Queen cried and pleaded, it helped not, she had to leave and find her brothers, for she thought she was to blame for everything; so finally, she left the royal court. She walked and walked so far into the wide world, you wouldn’t believe that such a fine lady had the strength to travel so far. One day, after walking for a long time through a large, vast forest, she became tired and sat down on a mound, where she fell asleep. She dreamed that she walked further into the forest to a small wooden cabin, and there were her brothers. The moment she woke up, right in front of her, she saw a path leading deeper into the forest. She followed it, and at length reached a small wooden house, just like in her dream. When she entered the room, no one was inside; but there were twelve beds, twelve chairs, and twelve spoons – twelve of everything. Seeing this made her so happy that she hadn't been this joyful in many years; for she immediately realized that her brothers lived there, and that it was they who owned the beds and chairs and spoons. She set about lighting a fire, tidying the beds, cooking food, and arranging and beautifying everything as well as she could; after she had prepared food for all, she ate herself, but forgot her spoon on the table, and then she crawled under the youngest brother's bed and lay there. No sooner had she hidden herself than she heard a rustling and whistling in the air, and then all twelve wild ducks came flying in; but the moment they crossed the threshold, they turned into princes. "Oh, how warm and good it is here!" they said; "God bless the one who has lit the fire and cooked such good food for us!" and each took his silver spoon to eat. But when each had taken his, there was one left, identical to the others. They looked at each other in wonder; "It is our sister's spoon," they said, "and if her spoon is here, she cannot be far away either." "If it's our sister's spoon, and she is here, then she must be killed, for she is the reason for all the evil we suffer," said the eldest prince, while she lay under the bed and listened. "No," said the youngest, "it would be a sin to kill her for this; she is not to blame for our suffering; if anyone is to blame, it should be our own mother." They started searching for her high and low, and finally searched under all the beds, and when they got to the youngest prince's bed, they found her and pulled her out. The eldest prince again wanted her dead, but she cried and pleaded so beautifully: "Oh, Lord God, don't kill me," she said; "I have wandered for years to find you, and if I could save you, I would gladly give my life." "If you will save us," they said, "then you shall live; for if you wish, you can certainly do so." "Just tell me how it can be done, and I will do whatever it takes," said the princess. "You shall gather down from the marsh," the princes said, "and you shall card, spin, and weave it into cloth, and when you have done that, you must cut and sew twelve hats, twelve shirts, and twelve cloths, one for each of us, and while you do this, you must not speak or laugh or cry; if you manage that, then we are saved.” “But where will I find enough marsh down for so many cloths and hats and shirts?” said Snow White and Rose Red. "We will show you," said the princes, and they took her to a large, vast marsh, where so much down stood swaying in the wind and shimmering in the sun, shining like snow from far away. Never had the princess seen so much marsh down before; she immediately began picking and gathering the best and fastest she could, and when she came home in the evening, she set about carding and spinning yarn from it. This went on well for quite a while; she gathered the down, carded, and in between, took care of the princes: she cooked and tidied their beds; in the evenings, they came whistling home as wild ducks, at night they were princes, but in the morning, they flew off again and were wild ducks all day. Once, when she was in the marsh to gather down – and if I’m not mistaken, it was the last time she was to go there – the young king who ruled the kingdom was out hunting and rode over to the marsh and saw her. He stopped and was amazed at who the beautiful maiden could be who walked in the marsh gathering down, and he asked her about it, and when he received no answer, he was even more curious and liked her so much that he wanted to take her with him to the castle and marry her. So, he told his servants to take her and put her on his horse. Snow White and Rose Red she wrung her hands and made gestures to them and pointed at the sacks where she had all her work, and when the king understood she wanted them to be taken along, he told the servants to load the sacks too. Once they had done that, the princess calmed down, as the king was both kind and handsome, and he was as gentle and friendly to her as could be. But when they arrived at the castle, and the old queen, who was the king’s stepmother, saw Snow White and Rose Red, she became so angry and jealous because she was so beautiful that she said to the king, “Can’t you see that the one you’ve brought to marry is a witch; she neither speaks nor laughs nor cries?” The king ignored her, but still wed Snow White and Rose Red, and they lived in great joy and splendor; but she did not forget to sew the shirts for her brothers. Before a year had passed, Snow White and Rose Red bore a little prince, which made the old queen even more furious and envious; and late one night, she sneaked into Snow White and Rose Red’s chamber while she slept, took the child, and threw it into the snake pit; then she cut the Queen’s finger and smeared the blood around her mouth and went to the king. “Come now and see,” said she, “what sort of a wife you have taken for queen; now she has eaten her own child.” Then the king was so distressed he was almost heartbroken, and said: “Yes, it must be true since I see it with my own eyes; but she won’t do it again, for this time I will spare her.” Before the year was out, she bore another son, and the same happened with him. The king's stepmother was even angrier and more envious; she sneaked into the Queen’s chamber at night, when she slept, took the child, threw it into the snake pit, cut the Queen’s finger, and smeared the blood around her mouth, and then she told the king that she had eaten this child too. The king became so saddened he couldn't bear it, and said: “Yes, it must be true since I see it with my own eyes; but she won’t do it again, and I’ll spare her this time too.” Before the year was out, Snow White and Rose Red bore a daughter, and her too, the old queen threw into the snake pit. While the young queen slept, she cut her finger, smeared the blood around her mouth, and went to the king: “Now you can come see if it's not like I said, a witch she is, for now she has eaten her third child as well.” Then there was such sorrow on the king that it was beyond measure; because now he could no longer spare her, but ordered she be burned alive at stake. When the pyre was burning and she was to be placed upon it, she gestured to them to take twelve planks and lay them around, and upon them, she placed the cloths and hats and shirts for her brothers, yet in the youngest brother's shirt, there was no left sleeve; that she hadn’t been able to complete. Not sooner had she done this than they heard a whirring and rushing in the air, and then flew twelve wild ducks over the forest, and each took his garment in its beak and flew off with it. “See now,” said the wicked queen to the king, “now you can see she's a witch, quickly burn her before the wood burns out.” “Oh,” said the king, “we have plenty of wood, we have the forest to get from; I want to see what this will lead to.” At that moment, the twelve princes came riding, so beautiful and strong as one could ever see; but the youngest prince had a duck wing instead of a left arm. “What is happening here?” asked the princes. “My Queen is to be burned because she’s a witch and has eaten her children,” replied the king. “She has not eaten her children,” said the princes. “Speak now, sister, now you have saved us, save yourself!” Then Snow White and Rose Red spoke and told how things had happened, that each time she bore a child, the old queen, the king’s stepmother, had sneaked into her room at night, taken the child, cut her finger, and smeared blood around her mouth. And the princes took the king and led him to the snake pit; there the three children lay playing with snakes and toads, and more beautiful children you couldn’t lay eyes on. The king took them and carried them to his stepmother and asked what punishment she thought should be given to someone who could betray an innocent queen and three blessed children. “She should be split between twelve untamed horses, so they each took their piece,” said the old queen. “You have set the sentence yourself, and your fate shall follow,” said the king, and so the old wicked queen was torn apart by twelve wild horses, each taking its piece of her. But Snow White and Rose Red the king took, with their children and the twelve princes, and they returned to their parents and told what had happened to them, and now there was great joy and celebration throughout the kingdom because the princess was saved and had also saved her twelve brothers.