Once upon a time, the Rooster, the Cuckoo, and the Spring Rooster bought a cow together. Since it was not possible to divide it and they couldn't agree on buying each other out, they decided that whoever woke up first in the morning would get the cow. The Rooster woke up first. "Now the cow is mine! Now the cow is mine!" he exclaimed. When the Rooster crowed, the Cuckoo woke up. "Half a cow! Half a cow!" sang the Cuckoo. As it called, the Spring Rooster woke up. "Dear brothers, share as right and just, right and just! Tsio! tsi!" said the Spring Rooster. So, tell me, who should have the cow? 

Once upon a time, there were a pair of poor people living in a wretched hut where there was nothing but black poverty, so they had neither bite nor firewood. However, if they lacked almost everything else, they were blessed with God's gift of children, gaining another every year. Now they could expect yet another one. The husband wasn't particularly thrilled by this; he would wander around grumbling and complaining, saying that once was enough for such divine gifts. When the time came for the wife to give birth, he went to the forest to gather wood because he didn't want to see the new loudmouth; he said he would have time enough to hear him when he screamed for food. 

Once the husband had left, the wife gave birth to a beautiful baby boy, and as soon as he entered the world, he looked around the room. "Oh dear mother," he said, "give me some old clothes from my brothers and a couple of days' provisions, and I will go out into the world to try my luck; I see you have children enough as it is." "God bless you, my son," the mother replied, "you are too little yet; it can never be allowed." But the boy kept insisting, pleading and begging until his mother finally had to let him have some old rags and a bit of food wrapped up; then he set off happily and confidently into the world.

But no sooner had he left than the wife gave birth to another boy; he too looked around and said, "Oh dear mother, give me some old clothes from my brothers and a couple of days' provisions, so I can go out into the world and find my twin brother; you have children enough anyway." "God bless you, you are too little, poor thing," said the wife; "it's never allowed." But despite her words, the boy persisted with his pleading and begging until he too received some old rags and a wrapped bundle of food, and then he bravely set off into the world to find his twin brother.

After walking for a while, the younger one spotted his brother a bit ahead; he called out to him, asking him to stop. "Hold on," he said, "you go on as if you were being paid for it, but you should at least see your younger brother before you set out into the world." The older brother stopped and looked back, and when the younger caught up and explained how they could be brothers, he continued: "But let's sit down and see what Mother packed us for provisions." And they did.

As they walked on, they came to a stream flowing through a green meadow, and the younger one suggested they should name each other. "Since we had to hurry so much that we didn't have time to do it at home, we should do it here," he said. "What do you want to be called?" asked the older one. "I want to be called Little Short," answered the other; "and you? What's your name?" "I want to be called King Lavring," replied the older one. They baptized each other, and then continued on their way. 

When they reached a crossroads, they agreed to part and go their separate ways. They tried to go separate paths, but each time they only found themselves meeting again. Finally, they decided to go in opposite directions, one to the east and the other to the west. "But if you ever find yourself in real danger or trouble," said the older brother, "call out to me three times, and I will come to help you; but don't call on me before you are in your utmost need." "Then we won't be seeing each other soon," said Little Short. So they bid farewell, and Little Short went eastwards while King Lavring headed west.

After walking alone for some time, Little Short met an old, hunchbacked woman who only had one eye. He quickly stole her eye. "Oh no! Where's my eye?" cried the old woman. "What will you give me if I return your eye?" asked Little Short. "I'll give you a sword that can defeat an entire army, no matter how large," replied the woman. "Alright, hand it over," said Little Short. The old woman gave him the sword, and she got her eye back.

Little Short continued on his way until he met another one-eyed, old, hunchbacked woman. He took her eye as well. "Oh no! Where's my eye?" she cried. "What will you give me if I return your eye?" asked Little Short. "I'll give you a ship that can sail on both fresh water and salt water, over mountains and through deep valleys," replied the old woman. "Yes, give it to me," said Little Short. The woman gave him a tiny ship, small enough that he could slip it into his pocket; then she got her eye back, and they went their separate ways.

After walking further, he met yet another old, hunchbacked woman with only one eye; he swiftly took her eye. "Oh no! Where's my eye?" she cried. "What will you give me if I return your eye?" "I'll teach you how to brew a hundred barrels of malt in one batch," replied the old woman. For this, she got her eye back, and they each went their own way.

A little while later, Little Short thought he might try out the ship. He took it out of his pocket, stepped in with one leg, and soon after the other leg, and the ship became as large as those that sail the seas. "Go now, on fresh water or salt, over mountains and deep valleys, and do not stop until you reach the King's court!" he commanded. The ship sped away quickly, as though it flew through the air, until it reached just below the King's court and stopped.

Those in the castle had been observing Little Short sail through the air, and they rushed down to see who could arrive by such a peculiar means. By the time they reached the shore, Little Short had already stepped out of his ship and put it back in his pocket. To the King's men, it appeared that only a small ragged boy stood at the shore. The King asked where he came from, but the boy said he didn't know, neither did he know how he arrived there. He earnestly pleaded for a position at the castle, saying that if there was nothing else for him to do, he could at least carry firewood and water for the kitchen maid; and he was allowed to do so.

When Little Short reached the castle, he saw that everything was draped in black, inside and outside, walls and roof alike; he asked the kitchen maid why that was. "I'll tell you," she replied, "the King's daughter has long been promised to three trolls, and on the upcoming Thursday evening, one of them will come to take her away. Knight Red has said he would rescue her, but who knows if he can do it; so everyone here is full of grief and sorrow." 

When Thursday evening came, Knight Red escorted the Princess down to the shore, where she was to meet the troll, but he wasn't much help in fighting the troll. As soon as the Princess sat down on the beach, Knight Red climbed into a large tree standing there, hiding as best he could among the branches. The Princess cried and earnestly pleaded for him not to leave her, but Knight Red paid no heed: "It's better for one to lose their life than two," he said.

Meanwhile, Little Short had begged the kitchen maid to let him go down to the beach for a bit. "Oh, what do you want there?" said the kitchen maid, "you have no business there." "Oh, please, let me go," said Little Short, "I would so much like to go down and have a bit of fun with the other boys." "Alright, go then," said the kitchen maid, "but make sure you aren't gone longer than it takes for the evening meal to be put on and the roast to be spitted; then bring a good load of wood back to the kitchen." Little Short promised and ran down to the shore.

As soon as he reached where the Princess was sitting, the troll came charging forward, causing the air to swirl and whistle around it; it was massive and terrifying, with five heads. "Fire!" cried the troll. "Fire back!" replied Little Short. "Can you fight?" shouted the troll. "If I can't, I can certainly learn," said Little Short. The troll swung a large, thick iron rod in its hand, flinging the earth five layers into the air. "Thud!" said Little Short, "that was something, too! Now watch this strike of mine!" He grabbed the sword he had received from the old hunchbacked woman and struck the troll, sending all five of its heads flying across the sand.

Seeing she was saved, the Princess was beside herself with joy, hopping and dancing. "Now rest a little while on my lap," she said to Little Short, and while he lay there, she clad him in a gold garment. No sooner had Knight Red noticed there was no longer a threat, he crept down from the tree, threatening the Princess until she promised to say that it was he who saved her; otherwise, he would take her life. Then he took the troll's tongue and lungs and placed them in his handkerchief, escorting the Princess back to the castle. If ever he was celebrated before, it was abundant now. The King was at a loss for ways to honor him, always seating him at his right hand at the table.

Little Short then dashed to the troll's ship, bringing back a great many gold and silver chains, and then hurried back to the castle. The kitchen maid gasped when she saw the wealth of gold and silver he brought. "But dear Little Short, where did you get all this from?" she asked, fearing he hadn't acquired it honestly. "Oh," replied Little Short, "I was home for a bit, and these chains had fallen off some tanks, so I took them for you." Hearing they were for her, she asked no more about it; she thanked Little Short, and all was good again.

The second Thursday evening, events played out similarly: everyone was in mourning and sorrow. But Knight Red boasted that since he had managed to save the Princess from one troll, surely he could rescue her from another, and escorted her down to the beach. However, he did little to harm the troll either. As the appointed time approached for the troll to arrive, he once again said, "It's better for one to lose their life than two," and retreated to the tree to hide.

Again, Little Short asked the cook for permission to go down to the shore. "Oh, why do you want to go there!" asked the cook. "Please, let me go," replied Little Short, "I'd like to have a bit of fun with the other boys." Yes, eventually, he was granted permission to go, but first, he had to promise to be back in time for turning the roast and carrying in a bundle of wood. As before, the troll charged in with the same swirl and whistle as before, but this time it was twice as large as the first with ten heads.

"Fire!" yelled the troll. "Fire back!" replied Little Short. "Can you fight?" roared the troll. "If I can't, I can certainly learn!" said Little Short. The troll swung its iron rod, even larger than the first troll's, flinging the earth ten layers into the air. "Thud!" said Little Short, "that was something, too! Now see this strike of mine!" Grabbing the sword, he struck the troll, sending all ten heads dancing across the sand.

"Rest a little while on my lap," said the Princess again, and while he lay there, she dressed him in a silver garment. As soon as Knight Red realized the coast was clear, he climbed down from the tree, threatening the Princess until she again promised to say that he had rescued her. Then he took the troll's tongue and lungs, placing them in his handkerchief, and escorted the Princess back to the castle. It was pure celebration and happiness, needless to say, and the King wondered endlessly about ways to show honor and reverence for Knight Red.

But Little Short took another load of gold and silver chains from the troll's ship. Returning to the castle, the kitchen maid gasped in shock at the sight of all the gold and silver. "But dear Little Short, where did you gather all this treasure?" she asked. Little Short explained that he had gone home and taken the chains which had fallen off some tanks, bringing them back for her. Content with the explanation, she asked no more.

When the third Thursday evening came around, it was just as the previous times; the entire kingdom was in mourning and sorrow. But Knight Red said there was no need for such fears; considering he had rescued the Princess from two trolls, there was no reason he couldn't save her from the third as well. He escorted her down to the shore, but as the time drew near for the troll to arrive, once again climbed into the tree for safety, insisting it was for the best.

Little Short again asked for permission to go down to the beach. "Oh, what will you do there!" replied the kitchen maid. But he begged until finally permitted, promising to be back for turning the roast as usual.

Just after setting foot on the beach, the troll arrived with an overwhelming swirl and whistle. It was far larger than any troll before, with fifteen heads. "Fire!" cried the troll. "Fire back!" replied Little Short. "Can you fight?" screamed the troll. "If I can't, I can certainly learn," replied Little Short. The troll swung its iron rod, throwing the earth fifteen layers into the air. "Thud!" said Little Short, "that was something, too! Now see this strike of mine!" He grabbed his sword, striking the troll so that all fifteen heads bounced across the sand.

The Princess was saved and expressed her heartfelt thanks and blessings to Little Short for rescuing her. "Rest a little on my lap," she said, and while he lay there, she dressed him in a brass garment. "But how will we reveal that it was you who saved me?" asked the Princess. "I'll tell you," Little Short replied. "When Knight Red leads you back and claims he rescued you, you'll know he is meant to have you and half the kingdom. But on the wedding day, when they ask who you want to offer you the toast at the bridal table, request the little boy in the kitchen who carries wood and water for the cook; as I pour, I'll spill a drop on his plate and none on yours, and so he'll strike me. We'll let it happen three times. But the third time, declare loudly, 'Shame on you, striking my treasure! He has saved me, and he's the one I want!'"

Little Short hurried back to the castle just as before; first, he went to the troll ship and gathered a great haul of gold, silver, and other valuables. Once again, he gifted the kitchen maid a load of gold and silver chains. As soon as Knight Red noticed, all danger had passed; he climbed down from the tree, threatening the Princess into promising to say he was her rescuer. He escorted her back to the castle, where even greater honors were heaped upon him as the King contemplated nothing beyond the celebration of the man who had saved his daughter from all three trolls.

But on the wedding day, the Princess insisted from the beginning to have the little boy from the kitchen pour the toasts at the bridal table. "Oh, what do you want with the ragged kitchen boy?" sneered Knight Red. But the Princess held firm, saying she wanted none other, and eventually, she got her way.

Just as arranged between Little Short and the Princess, he spilled a drop on Knight Red's plate and none on hers each time, prompting the Red Knight's anger and making him strike Little Short. With the first blow, the ragged garment he wore in the kitchen fell away; with the second, the brass garment fell, and finally, on the third, the silver garment slipped to the ground, revealing him adorned in the golden attire that shone brilliantly. At that moment, the Princess declared, "Shame on you for striking my treasure! He is the one who saved me, and he is the one I want!"

Knight Red swore and declared that he was the one who saved her; but the King insisted, "Whoever saved my daughter must have something to show." Knight Red immediately ran to fetch his handkerchief, containing lungs and tongues, while Little Short returned with the gold, silver, and jewels he had taken from the troll's ship. "One who possesses such precious items of gold and silver and gems," said the King, "must have slain the troll; for such things are found nowhere else," and thus, Knight Red was cast into the snake pit, and Little Short was to have the Princess and half the kingdom.

One day, as the King and Little Short were taking a walk, Little Short asked if the King had not had another child. "Yes," said the King, "I had another daughter; but the troll took her because there was no one who could save her. You shall have one daughter of mine now; however, if you can also save the one taken by the troll, you shall have her too, along with the other half of the kingdom." "I might just try," said Little Short, "but I'll need an iron rope five hundred fathoms long and five hundred men with fifteen weeks of provisions for them; I'm planning to venture far out to sea," he explained.

Yes, he would have all this, but the King feared he did not have a ship large enough to bear such loads. "I have a ship myself," said Little Short, taking out the one given to him by the old woman from his pocket. The King laughed, thinking it to be jest; but Little Short asked for everything he had requested, promising the King would soon see for himself.

Accordingly, they brought all he asked, and Little Short requested they place the rope in the ship first. However, none could lift the rope, and the crowd couldn't fit around the tiny little ship all at once. So Little Short himself took hold of the rope, laying some links into the ship, and as he tossed the rope onboard, the ship grew larger and larger until it was sufficiently large to accommodate the rope, the five hundred men, the provisions, and Little Short with room to spare. 

"Go now on fresh water and salt, past mountains and deep valleys, and stop not until you reach where the King's daughter is," commanded Little Short to the ship, which immediately sped off so quickly that the waves frothed yellow around it. 

After sailing far, far away, the ship stopped in mid-sea. "Yes, here we are," said Little Short, "but how do we get back?" Then he took the iron rope, fastening one end around his waist; "I must go to the bottom now," he said, "but when I tug hard on the rope and want to ascend again, you must haul together as one man, for otherwise, there will be no life to think of for you or me," and with that, he plunged into the water, leaving a golden plume around him.

On and down he sank until he reached the bottom. There, he saw a huge mountain with a door, which he entered. Inside, he found the other Princess sitting and sewing; yet, she clapped her hands when she saw Little Short. "Oh, thank God!" she exclaimed, "I have not seen any Christian soul since coming here." "I'm here to get you," Little Short assured her.

"Oh, you'll have no success," said the Princess, "it's futile even to think about it; if the troll sees you, he'll rip you to pieces." "That was all you said about him," said Little Short; "where is he now? It could be amusing to see him." The Princess explained that the troll was out on the lookout for someone who could brew a hundred barrels of malt in one batch, as the troll was planning a feast and that there was no other way. "I can do that," said Little Short. 

"If only the troll isn't too quick-tempered, I might tell him," suggested the Princess worriedly, "but he's so furious, he'll tear you apart the moment he walks in, I fear. However, let me think of something. Now, hide yourself in the woodshed here and we'll see how it turns out." Little Short did as told, and no sooner had he hidden than the troll appeared.

"Humph! The scent of Christian blood here," grunted the troll. "Yes, a bird flew overhead with Christian bones in its beak and dropped it down the chimney," explained the Princess; "I hurried to toss it away, but it must be what you're smelling still." "Yes, indeed," muttered the troll.

Then the Princess asked if he had found anyone who could brew the hundred barrels of malt in one batch. "No, no one can," replied the troll. "A little while ago, someone came by claiming he could," said the Princess. "Aren't you the clever one," huffed the troll. "So, why let him go? You knew I'd want a lad like that." "Oh, I didn't let him go," the Princess assured him, "but as you were quick-tempered, I reckoned I should hide him in the woodshed; if you found no one, he ought to be in there still." 

"Let him come in," ordered the troll. 

As Little Short emerged, the troll asked if it was true he could brew a hundred barrels of malt in one batch. "Indeed I can," said Little Short. "It's fortunate I found you," said the troll. "Get on with it, but heaven help you if the ale isn’t strong!" "Oh, it will have the right taste," assured Little Short, setting to work immediately on the brewing. "But I require more trolls to bear the malt tubs," stated Little Short, "for those I have cannot manage much."

With more trolls than necessary swarming about, the brewing went smoothly. Once the malt was ready, naturally, they all wanted to taste it — first the troll himself and then the rest. However, Little Short had brewed the malt so potent that they fell dead like flies upon drinking it. In the end, none remained apart from a poor old woman lying behind the stove.

"Pity you," Little Short remarked, "you ought to taste the malt as well!" So he scraped the bottom of the brewing vat with the ladle and served her some too, thereby ridding himself of the entire lot of them. Looking around, he noticed a large chest and laid heaps of gold and silver into it. He then tied the rope around himself, the Princess, and the chest, tugging with all his might; then the crew hauled them up safely.

Scarcely was Little Short aboard the ship than he commanded it: "Go now on salt water and fresh, over mountains and deep valleys, and stop not until you reach the King’s court," and instantly, the ship surged forth, sending the golden spray swirling around it.

When those dwelling in the castle saw the ship approaching, they were swift to gather in song and music, receiving Little Short with great jubilation, with the King being the happiest for the return of his other daughter as well. Yet Little Short wasn't altogether at ease; both Princesses longed to have him, and his heart only lay with the one he had first saved — the younger one. Consequently, he often pondered how to resolve this so he could be with her without upsetting the other sister.

One day, as he mused over these conflicts, a thought struck him. If only he had his brother King Lavring with him, the brother so alike in looks that no one could distinguish between them, then he could take the other Princess and half the kingdom while Little Short would be content with what remained. No sooner had this thought occurred to him than he stepped outside the castle to call for King Lavring.

Yet no one came. So he called again, louder this time, yet still no answer. He called out the third time, with all his might, and there stood his brother. "Did I not warn you only to call upon me in your greatest need?" reminded King Lavring, dismayed at Little Short. "And here stands not even a gnat to trouble you," he added, dealing his brother a blow that sent Little Short rolling over the field.

"God's shame upon you for such a strike!" Little Short protested. "First I gained one Princess and half the kingdom, then the other Princess and the remaining half, and was considering offering you one of the Princesses and half my domain beside — do you then find it fitting to deal me blows such as these?"

Upon hearing this, King Lavring promptly pleaded for forgiveness, and they soon reconciled their brotherly bond. "Now you know," continued Little Short, "that we appear so alike that none may distinguish one of us from the other. Change clothes with me and go to the castle; the Princesses shall think it is I entering the room; the first to kiss you is yours, while the other shall be mine," being aware that the elder Princess was the stronger and thus could foresee how events may unfold. With this, King Lavring wholeheartedly agreed, trading clothes with his brother as they planned, and entered the castle.

As soon as he stepped into the Princesses' chambers, both took him for Little Short and sprang towards him; but the elder sister, being bigger and stronger, pushed her sibling aside and embraced King Lavring, kissing him; thus, he gained the elder sister, and Little Short claimed the younger Princess. Surely, a wedding was held soon after, marked by such revelry and noise it spread over seven kingdoms to be heard far and wide.