Once upon a time, there was a king who had twelve sons. When they grew up, he told them they had to go out into the world and find a wife; however, she must be able to spin, weave, and sew a shirt in one day, or he wouldn't accept her as a daughter-in-law. He gave each of them a horse and a new suit of armor, and they set out to find wives. But after traveling a distance, they said they didn't want Askeladden with them because he was good for nothing. So Askeladden had to stay behind, as there was no helping it, and he didn’t know what to do or where to go. He became so sorrowful that he got off his horse and sat down in the grass to cry. After sitting for a little while, a mound in the grass began to move, and out came a small white thing. When it came closer, Askeladden saw it was a neat little girl, but she was exceedingly small. She approached and asked if he would come down and see the doll in the grass. Yes, he would, and he did.

When he got down there, the doll was sitting in the grass on a chair; she was now so beautiful and so dressed up, and she asked Askeladden where he was going and for what purpose he was traveling. 

He replied that there were twelve brothers, and the king had given them horses and armor and told them to travel the world to find a wife, and she must be able to spin, weave, and sew a shirt in one day. "But if you will do that and become my wife, I won't travel any further," Askeladden said to the doll in the grass. Yes, she would gladly do so, and she hurried to spin, weave, and sew the shirt, but it turned out very tiny.

Askeladden took this little shirt home with him, but when he came with it, he felt shy because it was so small. Nevertheless, the king said he could have her, and Askeladden happily went back to fetch his little sweetheart. When he got to the doll in the grass, he wanted to lift her onto his horse, but no, she didn’t want that; she said she wished to sit and ride in a silver spoon, and she had two small white horses herself to pull her. So they traveled, he on the horse and she in the silver spoon, with two small white mice as her horses. Askeladden always stayed on the other side of the road because he was afraid he might accidentally ride over her, she was so tiny. 

After they had traveled a distance, they came to a large body of water; Askeladden’s horse got skittish, jumped to the other side of the road, and overturned the spoon, so the doll in the grass fell into the water. Askeladden was terribly distressed, as he didn't know how to get her out again. But soon, a merman came up with her, and now she was as large as any other adult human and much more beautiful than before. So he set her in front of him on the horse and rode home.

When Askeladden arrived, all his brothers had returned with each of their brides; but they were so ugly and terrible, and along the way, they had been pulling each other’s hair. The hats on their heads were painted with tar and soot, and it had dripped from the hats down their faces, making them even uglier and more dreadful. When the brothers saw Askeladden's bride, they all became envious of him; but the king was so pleased with both of them that he chased all the others away. Askeladden then married the doll in the grass, and they lived happily ever after for a long, long time, and if they haven't died, they are living still.