Once upon a time there was a cottager who had three sons. He had nothing to leave them and nothing to set them to, and no idea what to do with them either. So in the end he told them they could take up whatever trade they fancied and go wherever they pleased, and he would gladly walk them a little way. And so he did, until they came to a place where three roads met. There each son took a road of his own, and their father said goodbye and went home.

What became of the two eldest I have never managed to find out. But the youngest walked far, and he walked long.

One night, as he was crossing a great forest, the weather turned so foul that he could hardly keep his eyes open. The wind howled and the sleet drove, and before he knew it he had strayed clean off the track and could find neither road nor path. He kept going, this way and that, and at last he saw a light glimmering far off among the trees. He had better try to reach it, he thought, and after a long, long while, he did.

It was a great timbered house, and the fire inside was blazing so merrily that he could tell nobody had gone to bed yet. So he went in. The room was heaped with things that didn’t look as if they belonged to anyone who lived there: saddles and copper kettles, silver candlesticks, bolts of good cloth. In the middle of it all an old crone was pottering about, tidying up.

“Good evening, Mother,” said the lad.

“Good evening,” said the crone.

“Brr! It’s a filthy night out there,” said the lad.

“So it is,” said the crone.

“Could I have a bed here for the night?”

“It’ll do you no good to sleep here,” said the crone. “If the folk who live here come home and find you, they’ll kill us both.”

“What sort of folk live here, then?”

“Oh, robbers and riff-raff of that sort,” said the crone. “They stole me when I was little, and I’ve kept house for them ever since.”

The lad looked at the fire, and then at the black night outside the door.

“I think I’ll lie down all the same,” he said. “Come what may. I’m not going back out in that, not at this time of night.”

“Well, it’ll be the worse for you,” said the crone.

So the lad lay down on a bed that stood by the wall, but he didn’t dare go to sleep. And sure enough, before long the door flew open and in came the robbers, stamping and swearing and shaking the wet from their cloaks. The crone stood clutching her broom and told them a stranger had come in, and she couldn’t get him to go away again.

“Did you see if he had any money?” said the robbers.

“Him? Money? That poor wretch?” said the crone. “He’s got nothing but the clothes on his back.”

The robbers put their heads together and muttered about what to do with him: whether to kill him, or what else. While they were talking it over, the lad got up and stood by the bed, as bold as you please, and joined the conversation. Did they happen to need a serving lad? he asked. He wouldn’t mind working for them.

“Well,” they said, “if you’ve a mind to learn our trade, there might be a place for you here.”

“One trade’s as good as another to me,” said the lad. “When I left home, my father said I could take up whatever I liked.”

“Have you a mind to steal, then?” said the robbers.

“Oh, yes,” said the lad. It couldn’t be a very hard trade to learn, he thought.

Now some way off there lived a farmer who had three oxen. He was going to drive one of them to town to sell it, and the robbers had got wind of it. If the lad could steal that ox from him on the road, they said, without the farmer knowing and without doing him any harm, then he could be their serving lad.

So the lad picked a fine shoe with a silver buckle out of the loot, and off he went. He set the shoe down in the middle of the road where the farmer would pass with his ox, and then he went into the forest and hid under a bush.

When the farmer came along, he saw the shoe at once.

“Now that’s a handsome shoe,” he said. “If I had the pair to it, I’d take them home, and maybe for once I’d get my wife in a good humour.” For he had a wife so cross and so contrary that he never went long between one thrashing and the next. But what use was one shoe without the other? So he walked on and left it where it lay.

The lad snatched up the shoe and ran through the forest as fast as his legs would carry him, until he was ahead of the farmer, and there he set it down in the road again. When the farmer came along with his ox and saw it, he was cross with himself for being such a fool as to leave the first one lying.

“I’d better run back and fetch the other,” he said to himself, and he tied the ox to the fence. “Then my wife will have a good pair of shoes, and maybe even she will crack a smile.”

He searched and searched for that shoe, up the road and down, but no shoe did he find, and in the end he had to go back with the one he had. Meanwhile the lad had untied the ox and gone off with it. When the farmer came back and saw that his ox was gone, he began to weep and wail, for he was afraid his wife would beat him to death when she found out.

Then he had an idea. He would go home and fetch the second ox, take that one to town and get a good price for it, and his wife need never hear a word.

So he did. But the robbers knew, for they had eyes and ears everywhere, and they told the lad that if he could take this one too, without the farmer knowing and without doing him any harm, he would be as good as any of them. Well, that was no great matter, the lad thought.

This time he took a rope and hung himself up by the armpits from a tree, right in the farmer’s path. When the farmer came along with his ox and saw the dreadful thing dangling there, he felt a bit peculiar.

“Heavy thoughts you must have had, to go and hang yourself there,” he said. “Ah well, you’ll have to hang, for all I can do. I can’t breathe life back into you.” And on he went with his ox.

The lad dropped down from the tree, took a short cut through the forest, got ahead of the farmer and hung himself up in the road again.

“Did you really have such heavy thoughts that you hanged yourself, or is it only some haunting come to plague me?” said the farmer. “Ah well, you’ll have to hang, ghost or whatever you are.” And on he went with his ox.

The lad did just as before: down from the tree, a short cut through the forest, and up he hung himself in the road once more. This time the farmer stopped and said to himself:

“Now this is a bad business. Could all three of them really have had such heavy thoughts that they hanged themselves? No, I don’t believe it’s anything but spooks. But I mean to know for certain. If the other two are still hanging back there, it’s true. If they aren’t, it’s nothing but haunting.”

So he tied up his ox and ran back to see whether they really were hanging there. And while he went along peering up into every tree, the lad hopped down, took the ox and was off with it.

When the farmer came back and found his ox gone, he was in a sorry state, as you may well imagine. He wept and he wailed. But at last he pulled himself together and thought: There’s nothing else for it. I’ll have to go home and take the third one, without my wife knowing, and sell it all the dearer to make up for the rest. So he did, and his wife was none the wiser. But the robbers knew, and they told the lad that if he could steal this one the same way as the other two, he would be master over the whole lot of them.

So the lad ran off into the forest, and when the farmer came along with his ox, the lad began to bellow dreadfully in among the trees, just like a great big ox. When the farmer heard that, he was overjoyed, for he thought he knew the voice of his big bullock, and now he would find them both again. So he tied up the third ox and ran off the road to search the forest. Meanwhile the lad went off with the third ox.

When the farmer came back and found that one gone too, there was no end to his misery. He didn’t dare go home for days and days, for fear his wife would beat him dead on the spot.

The robbers weren’t much pleased either, having to own that the lad was master over them all. So they thought they would try him at something he couldn’t manage. One day they all went off together and left him at home on his own.

The first thing he did, once they were well out of sight, was to drive the three oxen out onto the road, and off they plodded, straight home to the farmer they had been taken from. You may be sure the farmer was glad. Then the lad took all the robbers’ horses and loaded them with the best of everything he could find, gold and silver and clothes and other fine things, and told the crone to give the robbers his regards and thank them for having him. He was off now, and they would have a hard job catching him. And away he went.

After a long while he found his way back to the road he had been walking the night he came upon the robbers. When he drew near the place where his father lived, he put on a uniform he had found among the robbers’ things. It was cut like a general’s, with gold braid down the front, and he drove into the yard with his horses like some great lord. Then he went in and asked if he might have a bed for the night.

No, that he could not. “How could the likes of me put up a fine gentleman like you?” said the cottager. “I’ve barely a rag to lie on myself, and poor enough rags they are.”

“You were always a hard man,” said the lad, “and you still are, if you won’t give your own son a roof over his head.”

“You? My son?” said the cottager.

“Don’t you know me?”

Well, yes, now he did. “But what trade have you taken up, to have made such a fine fellow of yourself in such a hurry?”

“I’ll tell you,” said the lad. “You said I could take up whatever I liked, so I apprenticed myself to some thieves and robbers. Now I’ve served my time, and I’m a Master Thief.”

Close by the cottage there lived a bailiff. He had such a big farm and so much money that he had never got to the end of counting it, and he had a daughter too, who was pretty and pleasant and good and kind. She was the one the Master Thief wanted, and he told his father to go to the Bailiff and ask for her on his behalf.

“And if he asks what trade I follow, you can tell him I’m a Master Thief.”

“I think you’ve gone soft in the head,” said the cottager. “Nobody in his right mind would think of such madness.”

But go he must, said the Master Thief. There was no way round it.

“Heaven help me, I daren’t go to the Bailiff and speak for you,” said the cottager. “Him so rich, with all that money.”

But the Master Thief would hear none of it. His father would go whether he liked it or not, and if he wouldn’t go the easy way, he would go the hard way. And when the old man still dug in his heels, his son went after him with a great birch club, until he came blubbering in at the Bailiff’s door.

“Now then, my good man, what’s the matter with you?” said the Bailiff.

So the cottager told him how he had three sons who had gone off one day, and how he had told them they might go where they liked and take up whatever they liked. “And now the youngest has come home and threatened me into coming here to ask for your daughter for him, and to tell you he’s a Master Thief,” he said, and he wept and carried on.

“There, there, my good man,” said the Bailiff, and laughed. “You can tell him from me that he’ll have to prove it first. If he can steal the roast off the spit in my kitchen on Sunday, while every one of us is watching it, he shall have my daughter. You tell him that.”

The cottager told him, and the Master Thief said it sounded easy enough. He got hold of three live hares and put them in a sack, and he dressed himself in rags so wretched and shabby that it was pitiful to see. On Sunday morning he sneaked into the Bailiff’s passage with his sack over his shoulder, like any beggar boy. The Bailiff himself and his whole household were in the kitchen, keeping watch on the roast as it turned and sizzled on the spit.

Then the Master Thief let one hare out of the sack, and off it went, streaking round and round the yard.

“Look at that hare!” cried the people in the kitchen, and they wanted to run out and catch it.

The Bailiff saw it too. “Oh, let it run,” he said. “There’s no sense trying to catch a hare on the hop.”

It wasn’t long before the Master Thief let the second one go. They saw it from the kitchen and thought it was the same one, and they wanted to run out after it, but the Bailiff said it was no use.

A little while later he let the third one go too, and off it went, dashing and tumbling about the yard. They saw that one as well, and thought it was still the same hare out there, and now there was no holding them.

“That’s a peculiar hare, the way it tears about,” said the Bailiff. “Come on, let’s see if we can catch it after all.”

He made for the door, and the whole household surged out after him, the hare in front and everybody after, and a fine sight it was.

But while they were all crowding out of the door, the Master Thief slipped into the kitchen, lifted the roast off the spit, still sizzling, and made off with it.

Where the Bailiff found a roast for his dinner that day I don’t know. But this much I do know: it wasn’t roast hare, though he ran himself hot and tired trying.

The parson came to dinner that day, and when the Bailiff told him about the trick the Master Thief had played, the parson made such fun of him that there was no end to it.

“I can’t think how anyone could be taken in by a fellow like that,” said the parson.

“You just mind yourself,” said the Bailiff. “He may be at your door before you know it.”

But the parson only laughed, and kept on at the Bailiff for letting himself be led by the nose.

Later that afternoon the Master Thief came and asked for the Bailiff’s daughter, as he had been promised.

“Oh, you’ll have to pass a few more tests first,” said the Bailiff, all honey. “What you did today wasn’t much, when you think about it. Couldn’t you play a proper trick on the parson? He’s sitting in there making fun of me for being fooled by a fellow like you.”

Oh, that was no great matter, said the Master Thief.

He dressed himself up like a bird. He threw a big white sheet over himself, broke the wings off a goose and fixed them to his back, and climbed up into a great maple that stood in the parson’s garden. When the parson came home that evening, a voice began to call from the tree: “Master Lars! Master Lars!” For the parson’s name was Master Lars.

“Who is that calling me?” said the parson.

“I am an angel, sent by the Lord to tell you that for your godliness you shall be taken up alive into the Kingdom of Heaven,” said the Master Thief. “Next Monday evening you must be ready for the journey, for then I shall come and fetch you in a sack. And all your gold and all your silver, and whatever else you have of this world’s vanities, you must pile up in your best parlour.”

Well, Master Lars fell on his knees before the angel and thanked him and thanked him. The next Sunday he preached a farewell sermon. He told his flock how an angel of God had come down into the great maple in his garden and told him he would be taken up alive into Heaven for his godliness, and he preached so movingly that everyone in the church wept, young and old.

On Monday evening the Master Thief came as an angel again, and the parson fell on his knees and thanked him before he was put into the sack. And when he was well and truly inside, the Master Thief dragged and hauled him along, over stock and stone.

“Oh! Ow!” cried the parson in the sack. “Where is this taking me?”

“This is the narrow way that leads to the Kingdom of Heaven,” said the Master Thief, and dragged him on until he had very nearly killed him.

At last he flung him into the Bailiff’s goose house, and the geese set on him, hissing and nipping, until he was more dead than alive.

“Ow, ow, ow! Where am I now?” said the parson.

“Now you are in Purgatory, to be purged and made pure for life everlasting,” said the Master Thief. And off he went and took all the gold and silver and fine things the parson had piled up in his parlour.

In the morning, when the goose girl came to let the geese out, she heard the parson lying in the sack, moaning and groaning.

“Oh, in Jesus’ name, who’s that, and what’s the matter with you?” she said.

“Oh, if you’re an angel from Heaven, let me out and let me go back down to earth,” said the parson, “for it’s worse here than in Hell! The little devils are pinching me with tongs!”

“I’m no angel, God knows,” said the girl, and helped the parson out of the sack. “I only mind the Bailiff’s geese, I do. It’ll be them little devils that have been pinching your reverence.”

“Oh, this is the Master Thief’s doing! Oh, my gold and my silver and my fine clothes!” cried the parson, and he wailed and carried on and ran off home so fast that the goose girl thought he had gone clean out of his mind.

When the Bailiff heard how things had gone with the parson, and that he had been down the narrow way and into Purgatory, he nearly laughed himself sick. But when the Master Thief came and asked for his daughter, as he had been promised, the Bailiff was all honey again.

“You’ll have to do something better than that, so I can see what you’re really good for,” he said. “I have twelve horses in my stable, and I’ll put twelve men on them, one on each. If you can steal the horses out from under them, then I’ll see what I can do.”

“That could be managed,” said the Master Thief, “if I’m really to have your daughter, then—”

“If you can do it, I’ll do my best,” said the Bailiff.

So the Master Thief went to the shop and bought brandy enough to fill two pocket flasks. Into one of them he stirred a sleeping draught; the other held nothing but brandy. Then he hired eleven men to lie in wait behind the Bailiff’s barn that night. With a kind word and a coin he borrowed a ragged skirt and jacket from an old woman, took a stick in his hand and a bag on his back, and towards evening he went hobbling off to the Bailiff’s stable. The stable lads were watering the horses for the night and had their hands full.

“What the devil do you want?” said one of them to the old woman.

“Oh, brr! It’s so cold!” said the old woman, and she shivered and shook and carried on. “Brr! It’s cold enough to freeze a poor soul to death!” And she shivered and shook some more. “Oh Lord, might I sit just inside the stable door?”

“The devil you may! Clear off! If the Bailiff sees you here, we’ll catch it,” said one of them.

“Oh, the poor old thing,” said another, who felt sorry for her. “Let her sit there. She won’t do any harm.”

The others were dead against it. But while they argued and saw to the horses, she edged her way further and further in, until at last she was sitting behind the door, and after that nobody gave her a thought.

As the night wore on, it grew bitterly cold for the men sitting up on the horses.

“Brr! It’s devilish cold,” said one, and beat his arms across his chest.

“I’m so cold I’m shaking,” said another.

“If only a man had a bit of tobacco!” said a third.

Well, one of them had a plug, and they shared it out, though it didn’t come to much a man, and they chewed and they spat. That helped a little, but before long it was just as bad again.

“Brr!” said one of them, and shuddered.

“Brr!” said the old woman, and her teeth chattered so hard her jaws rattled. Then she took out the flask with nothing but brandy in it, and her hand shook so that the brandy sloshed about inside, and she took a swig that went glug in her throat.

“What’s that you’ve got in your flask, old woman?” said one of the lads.

“Oh, it’s only a little drop of brandy, my dear,” she said.

“Brandy! What? Give us a drop! Give us a drop!” shouted all twelve at once.

“Oh, but I’ve got so little,” the old woman whimpered. “It won’t even wet your mouths.”

But they would have some, and they must have some, and there was no help for it. So she took out the flask with the sleeping draught and, without even getting up, held it to the mouth of the lad on the horse nearest the door. And now her hand didn’t shake at all. She steered that flask so steadily that each of them got just what he needed, while the rest leaned down from their horses with their breath steaming, waiting their turn. The first lad’s eyelids began to droop and the reins slid through his fingers, and before the twelfth had even drunk, the first was sitting there snoring.

Then the Master Thief threw off his beggar’s rags. One after another he lifted the lads off the horses, as easy as you like, and set them astride the partitions between the stalls. Then he called up his eleven men, and off they went with the Bailiff’s horses.

In the morning, when the Bailiff came out to see how his men were getting on, they were just coming round. They went to spur their mounts on and hacked at the partitions with their heels until the splinters flew. Some of them fell off, and some stayed stuck up there like a row of fools.

“Oh, yes,” said the Bailiff. “I can see who’s been here. But a sorry lot you are, sitting there and letting the Master Thief steal the horses out from under your backsides!” And they all got a good hiding for not keeping better watch.

Later that day the Master Thief came back and told how he had gone about it, and asked for the Bailiff’s daughter, as he had been promised. But the Bailiff gave him a hundred dalers and said he would have to do something better still.

“Do you think you could steal my horse from me while I’m out riding it?” said the Bailiff.

“That could be managed,” said the Master Thief, “if I’m really to have your daughter.”

Well, the Bailiff would see what he could do. And he said that on such-and-such a day he would be out riding on the big drill ground.

The Master Thief lost no time. He got hold of an old broken-down mare, made her a harness of nothing but willow withies and broom twigs, and bought a rickety old cart and a big barrel. Then he told a poor old woman he would give her ten dalers if she would lie down inside the barrel with her mouth to the tap-hole. He would stick his finger in the hole. No harm would come to her; she would only be going for a little drive. And if he took his finger out more than once, she should have ten dalers more.

Then he dressed himself in rags, smeared his face with soot and put on a wig and a big beard of goat’s hair, so that not a soul could know him. And off he went to the drill ground, where the Bailiff had been riding up and down for a good long while.

The old mare went so slowly and so sluggishly that the cart hardly moved at all. It crept and it crept, then it stood stock-still, then it crept on a little again. It was such a sorry sight that the Bailiff never dreamed it could be the Master Thief. He rode straight over and asked the man if he had seen anyone skulking about in the woods.

No, said the man, he hadn’t seen a soul.

“Listen,” said the Bailiff. “If you’ll ride into the woods and have a good look round for anyone skulking there, you can borrow my horse, and there’ll be something in it for your trouble.”

“I can’t do that,” said the man. “I’m on my way to a wedding with this barrel of mead I’ve been to fetch, and the tap fell out on the road, and now I have to walk along with my finger in the hole.”

“You ride,” said the Bailiff. “I’ll mind the horse and the barrel both.”

Well, all right, said the man. But he begged the Bailiff to take great care and be quick to put his finger in the tap-hole the moment he took his own out.

The Bailiff said he would do his best, and the Master Thief climbed up on the Bailiff’s horse.

But time went by, and on and on it went, and nobody came back. At last the Bailiff grew tired of standing there with his finger in the tap-hole, and he pulled it out.

“Now I get ten dalers more!” shrieked the old woman in the barrel.

Then he saw how things stood with that barrel of mead, and he set off home on foot. But he hadn’t gone far before his own people came to meet him, leading his horse, for the Master Thief had already been to the house with it.

The next day the Master Thief came and asked for the Bailiff’s daughter, as he had been promised. The Bailiff was all honey once more. He gave him two hundred dalers and said there was just one more test. If he could manage that, he would have her.

Oh, the Master Thief was sure he could, if only he knew what it was.

“Do you think you could steal the sheet off our bed and the shift off my wife?” said the Bailiff.

“That’s not impossible,” said the Master Thief, “if I’m really to have your daughter, then—”

Late that night the Master Thief went out to the gallows, cut down a thief who was hanging there, slung him over his shoulder and carried him off. Then he fetched a long ladder, set it against the Bailiff’s bedroom window, climbed up, and bobbed the dead man up and down, for all the world like someone standing outside and peeping in.

It was a wild night, with the moon racing in and out of the clouds. Inside, a candle stub was burning by the bed.

“There’s the Master Thief, Mother!” said the Bailiff, and he nudged his wife. “Now I’m going to shoot him.” And he took up the rifle he had laid ready beside the bed.

“Oh no, you mustn’t do that,” said his wife. “You invited him here yourself.”

“Yes, I’m going to shoot him, Mother,” he said. And he knelt down on the floor by the bed and aimed and aimed, while his wife sat clutching the covers. One moment the head was up, so he caught a glimpse of it; the next it was gone again. At last he had it square in his sights. The rifle went off with a bang, the glass flew, and the dead man fell and hit the ground with a thump. And down the ladder went the Master Thief, as fast as he could go.

“Well, I am the highest authority hereabouts,” said the Bailiff, “but people will always find something to say, and it would be awkward if anyone saw this dead man. I had better go out and bury him.”

“You must do as you think best, Father,” said his wife.

So the Bailiff got up and went downstairs, and the moment he was out of the door, the Master Thief slipped inside and went straight up to the wife.

“Well, Father,” she said, for she thought it was her husband, “finished already?”

“Oh yes, I put him in a hole,” he said, “and scraped a bit of earth over him, just enough to hide him, it’s such a filthy night. I’ll do it properly later. But let me have the sheet to wipe myself on. He was so bloody, and I’ve got myself in a terrible mess with him.”

So he got the sheet.

“You’d better let me have your shift too,” he said. “The sheet won’t do it, I can see.”

So he got that too. Then he remembered he had forgotten to lock the front door, and he would have to go down and see to it before he came to bed. And off he went, with the sheet and the shift.

A good while later the real Bailiff came back.

“Goodness, what a long time you took to lock the door, Father!” said his wife. “And what have you done with the sheet and the shift?”

“What’s that you say?” said the Bailiff.

“I’m asking what you’ve done with the sheet and the shift you took to wipe the blood off,” said his wife.

“God help me,” said the Bailiff. “Has he been here as well?”

The next day the Master Thief came and asked for the Bailiff’s daughter, as he had been promised. And this time the Bailiff didn’t dare do anything but give her to him, and a good lump of money besides. For, to tell the truth, he was afraid that otherwise the Master Thief might steal the eyes out of his head and make him the laughing stock of the parish.

The Master Thief lived well and honestly ever after. Whether he ever stole anything again, I couldn’t tell you. But if he did, it was only for the fun of it.