Certainly! Here is the translation of the text into English while preserving its original narrative style:

The princess had placed a ring on his finger when he was by the water, into the glass, and asked the steward to greet the bride and bring it to her. The princess immediately rose from the table. "Who has truly deserved one of us," she said, "either the one who saved us, or the one who sits as the groom?" There could only be one opinion, everyone agreed, and as Halvor heard this, he was not long in shedding his ragged clothes and dressing up as the groom. "Yes, there is the right one!" shouted the youngest princess when she saw him, and she pushed the other aside and married Halvor. 

Lord Peter. Once upon a time, there was a pair of poor folks; they had nothing but three sons. I don't know what the two eldest were called, but the youngest was named Per. When the parents died, the children were to inherit them, but there was nothing to be had but a pot, a griddle, and a cat. The eldest, who was to have the best, took the pot: "When I loan out the pot, I always get permission to scrape it," he said; the second took the griddle: "For when I loan out the griddle, I always get a taste of the pancake," he said; but the youngest had nothing to choose from; if he wanted anything, it would have to be the cat. "If I loan out the cat, I don't get anything for it," he said; "If the cat gets a bit of milk, she wants it for herself. But I'll take her with me anyway; it would be a pity for her to stay here and waste away." So the brothers set out into the world to seek their fortune, each going their own way. But after the youngest had walked a while, the cat said, "You will surely find fortune because you didn't want me to stay behind in that old house and waste away. Now I shall go into the forest and catch some rare animals, and then you will go up to the king's castle, as you see over there, and say that you are coming with a small gift for him. When he asks who it is from, you shall say it is from Lord Per." 

Well, Per hadn't waited long when the cat came with a reindeer from the forest; she had leapt onto the reindeer's head, and when she had settled herself between its horns, she said, "If you do not go straight to the king's castle, I will scratch your eyes out." The reindeer dared do no other. When Per arrived at the king's castle, he went into the kitchen with the reindeer and said, "I am here with a small gift for the king, should he choose not to disdain it." The king came out to the kitchen, and when he saw the magnificent reindeer, he was very pleased. "But my dear friend! Who is it that sends me such a grand gift?" said the king. "Ah, it is from Lord Per," said the boy. "Lord Per?" said the king; "Where shall I say he resides?" — for he thought it a shame that he did not know such a fine man. But the boy would not tell him; he did not dare for his master, he said. So the king gave Per much money and asked him to extend many greetings and thanks for the gift. 

The second day, the cat went into the forest again, leapt onto a stag's head, and threatened it to walk to the king's castle. Per went into the kitchen with it again and said he had a small gift for the king, should he choose not to disdain it. The king was even happier with the stag than he had been with the reindeer, and again asked who had sent him such a grand gift. "It is from Lord Per," said the boy; but when the king wanted to know where Lord Per lived, he received the same answer as the day before, and that time, the king gave Per even more money. 

On the third day, the cat came with an elk. When Per entered the kitchen in the king's castle, he said he had a small gift for the king, should he choose not to disdain it. The king immediately came out to the kitchen, and upon seeing such a splendid elk, he was so happy he did not know what to do with himself, and that day he gave Per even more money: it was certainly a hundred dollars. He was determined to find out where Lord Per lived, and asked and inquired about everything; but the boy said he did not dare tell him for his master had so strictly forbidden it. "Then ask Lord Per to visit me," said the king. Yes, the boy would do that, he said. 

But when he left the king's castle and met the cat, Per said, "You've really put me in a bind now; the king wants me to visit him, and I have nothing but the rags I stand in." "Oh, don't worry about that," said the cat; "in three days, you shall have horses and a carriage and such fine clothes that gold will drip from you; then you may visit the king. But everything you see of the king's, you must say you have much finer and grander at home; you mustn't forget that." No, Per would certainly remember that, he thought. 

When the three days were up, the cat came with a carriage and horses and clothes and everything Per needed; everything was so grand that no one had seen anything like it before; so he traveled, and the cat sprang with him. The king received him warmly and graciously; but whatever the king offered him and showed him, Per said it might be good enough, but he had it finer and grander at home. The king didn't like this very much; but Per stuck to his story, and finally, the king became so angry that he couldn't bear it any longer. "Now I will come with you to your home," said the king, "and see if it is true that you have it so much better and grander. But should you be lying, then God have mercy on you, that's all I'm saying!" 

"Oh, you've really put me in a bind," said Per to the cat, "now the king wants to come with me home; but home isn't easy to find." "Oh, don't worry about that," said the cat; "just follow where I run ahead." So they traveled, first Per, riding with the cat running ahead, and then the king with all his retinue. After a while, they came to a large flock of beautiful sheep; their wool was so long it almost reached the ground. "Will you say that this flock of sheep belongs to Lord Per when the king asks you, you shall receive this silver spoon," said the cat to the shepherd — she had taken it with her from the king's castle. Yes, he would gladly do that. When the king arrived, he said to the shepherd boy, "I have never seen such a large and beautiful flock of sheep! Who owns them, my little boy?" — "They belong to Lord Per," said the boy. 

Later, they came to a large, large herd of beautiful brindled cows; they were so fat that they glistened. "Will you say that this herd of cows belongs to Lord Per when the king asks you, you shall have this silver ladle," said the cat to the shepherd girl — the ladle she also had taken from the king's castle. "Yes, gladly," said the shepherd girl. When the king came, he was astounded by the grand herd; for such splendid cattle he thought he had never seen before, and he asked the girl herding them who owned the brindled livestock there. "Oh, it's Lord Per," said the girl. 

Then they traveled a bit more and finally came to a great, great herd of horses; they were the most beautiful anyone could see, large and fat, and there were six of each color, both red, bay, and blue. "Will you say that this herd of horses belongs to Lord Per when the king asks you, you shall have this silver ring," said the cat to the shepherd boy — the ring she too had taken from the king's castle. Yes, he would indeed do that, said the boy. When the king came, he was utterly taken aback by the great magnificent herd of horses; for such horses he had never seen the like of, he declared. He asked the shepherd boy who the red, bay, and blue horses belonged to. "They belong to Lord Per," said the boy. 

After they had traveled a fair distance more, they arrived at a castle; firstly, there was a gate of bronze, then one of silver, and finally one of gold; the castle itself was of silver, so shiny, it hurt the eyes, for the sun shone upon it as they arrived. There they went inside, and there the cat said that Per should say he lived. Inside, the castle was even grander than outside: Everything was gold, both chairs and tables and benches. After the king had walked around and seen everything, both high and low, he became quite embarrassed. "Yes, Lord Per has it grander than I, there's no denying that," he said, and he was about to set off again. But Per asked him to stay and dine with him, and so the king did, though he was sour and grumpy the entire time. 

While they were sitting at the table, the troll who owned the castle knocked on the gate. "Who dares to eat my food and drink my mead like swine in here?" roared the troll. As soon as the cat heard him, she ran out to the gate. "Wait a moment, let me tell you how the farmer deals with winter rye," said the cat; and then she rambled on about winter rye. "First, the farmer plows his field," she said; "then he manures it, and then he plows it again." Just then the sun rose. "Look around and you will see the beautiful lovely maiden behind you!" said the cat to the troll. When the troll turned to look, he was dazzled by the sun, and he burst. "Now all this is yours," said the cat to Lord Per, "now you must cut off my head; it is the only thing I ask of you for what I've done for you." 

"No," said Lord Per, "I will not do that." "Yes," said the cat, "if you don't, I'll scratch your eyes out." So Lord Per had to do it, as much as he didn't want to: he cut off the cat's head. But as soon as he did, she turned into the most beautiful princess anyone had ever seen, and Lord Per was utterly captivated by her. "Yes, all this magnificence was once mine," said the princess, "but that troll bewitched me, so I had to live as a cat with your parents. Now do as you will, whether you want to take me as your queen or not; for now, you are king of the entire realm," said the princess. Oh yes, it can very well be that Lord Per wanted her as his queen. So there was a wedding and a feast for eight days, and then I was no longer with Lord Per and his queen.