Once upon a time, there was a man named Gudbrand. He lived in the countryside and had a farm. Everyone called him Gudbrand in Lien. Gudbrand and his wife were very happy together. Whatever Gudbrand did, his wife thought it was the best thing ever, and she never minded how he went about things.

They owned their farm and had some money saved up. They also had two cows in their barn. One day, Gudbrand's wife suggested, "Maybe we should go to town and sell one cow to get some money. We're doing well enough to have a bit more cash, and I think one cow is plenty for us."

Gudbrand agreed and set off to town with one of the cows. But when he got there, no one wanted to buy it. As he walked back home, he met a man with a horse. "A horse is even better!" thought Gudbrand and traded the cow for the horse.

Later, he met a man with a pig. "A pig is even better than a horse," he thought, and made another trade. Next, Gudbrand met someone with a goat, and he thought, "A goat is even better than a pig!" so he traded again.

He kept walking and met a man with a sheep. Surely, a sheep had to be better than a goat, right? So, he made another swap. Then, he came upon a man with a goose and thought a goose was better than a sheep, which led to yet another trade. 

Finally, he met a man with a rooster. Gudbrand thought, "A rooster is better than a goose," so he exchanged the goose for the rooster. But then he got very hungry and decided to sell the rooster for twelve coins to buy food.

On his way home, Gudbrand stopped at a neighbor's house. The neighbors asked how his trip had gone, and Gudbrand told them all about his trades. They said, "Your wife might not be too happy with this!" But Gudbrand was confident, "My wife never gets upset with me."

To prove it, the neighbor made a bet with Gudbrand and they went together to Gudbrand's home. The neighbor waited outside to listen.

When Gudbrand walked in, his wife asked, "How did it go in town?" Gudbrand began telling her about his trades, starting with trading the cow for a horse. His wife was delighted because now they could ride to church. She thanked him and asked, "Where's the horse?"

Gudbrand explained he traded the horse for a pig. Again, his wife was happy, dreaming about all the bacon. "Where's the pig?" she asked. Gudbrand continued the story, saying he had swapped the pig for a goat. His wife was thrilled, now thinking of all the milk and cheese they'd have. 

Next, he said he traded the goat for a sheep. His wife thought that was even better because they could get wool and make clothes. "Where's the sheep?" she asked. Then Gudbrand told her about trading the sheep for a goose. "How wonderful!" she exclaimed, excited about goose feathers for pillows.

Finally, Gudbrand said he traded the goose for a rooster. His wife laughed with joy as the rooster would wake them up every morning right on time. But then, Gudbrand admitted he sold the rooster to buy food as he was so hungry. 

His wife was pleased and said, "I'm glad you ate! We don't need a rooster if it means you’re well. As long as I have you, I am happy."

Gudbrand opened the door to show the neighbor, "Did I win the bet?" And indeed, the neighbor had to admit Gudbrand had won.

The end!