Once upon a time, there was a man named Gudbrand, who owned a farm situated far away on a hillside, which is why people called him Gudbrand in the Hillside. He and his wife lived together so harmoniously and agreed upon everything so well that whatever Gudbrand did seemed so well done to his wife that it couldn’t be done better; she was entirely content regardless of how he acted. They owned their land and had a hundred dollars stashed away, along with two cows tethered in the barn. 

One day, Gudbrand's wife suggested, "I think we should go to town with one of the cows and sell it. That way, we could get some extra money; we are fine people, and we should have some coins in hand just like others. We shouldn’t touch the hundred dollars resting in the chest, but I'm not sure why we need more than one cow. Plus, it would be easier for me since I only have to take care of one cow instead of constantly tending to two."

Gudbrand thought his wife's suggestion was sensible and smart, so he took the cow and went to town to sell it. However, when he arrived, nobody wanted to buy the cow. "Oh well," thought Gudbrand, "I can just return home with my cow; I have space and a tether for it, and it’s the same distance both ways.” And with that, he started heading back home.

On his way back, he met a man selling a horse. Gudbrand thought it was better to have a horse than a cow and traded with the man. After walking a bit further, he met someone driving a fat pig ahead of him. He thought it was better to have a fat pig than a horse, so he traded with the man. Continuing on, he met a man with a goat and thought it would be better to have a goat than a pig, so he traded once again. 

Walking much further, he came across a man with a sheep, and he thought it would be better to have a sheep than a goat, so he traded. A little further on, he met a man with a goose, so he exchanged the sheep for the goose. After going a long, long way, he encountered a man with a rooster and thought it would be better to have a rooster than a goose, so he made another trade. 

He walked until late in the day, but then he got hungry and sold the rooster for twelve coins to buy himself some food, thinking, "It's better to save my life than to have a rooster," Gudbrand thought sensibly.

He continued towards home until he reached his nearest neighbor's farm, where he stopped in. "How did it go for you in town?" the people there asked. "Oh, it went so-so," replied Gudbrand, "I can’t exactly praise my luck, nor can I blame it," and he proceeded to tell them the whole story from start to finish.

"You’ll certainly have a warm welcome when you get home to your wife!" said the man at the farm. "God help you! I wouldn’t want to be in your shoes."

"I believe it could have gone much worse," replied Gudbrand. "But whether it went wrong or right, I have such a kind wife that she’ll never say a word, no matter what I've done."

"Yes, I know with certainty, though I find it hard to believe," the neighbor said. "Shall we bet on it?" suggested Gudbrand. "I have a hundred dollars at home in the chest; dare you wager the same?"

They made the bet, and Gudbrand stayed there until evening when it began to darken. Then they went together to his home. There, the neighbor stood by the door to listen while Gudbrand went inside to his wife.

"Good evening," said Gudbrand as he entered. "Good evening," she answered, "Thank goodness you’re here!" Yes, indeed he was. She then asked him how it went in town.

"Oh, just so-so," answered Gudbrand, "nothing to boast about. When I got to town, no one wanted the cow, so I traded it for a horse."

"Well, thank you very much for that," said his wife. "We are such fine people that we can drive to church just like others, and if we can afford a horse, we can surely manage to keep one. Children, go put the horse in the stable!"

"Well," said Gudbrand, "I don't actually have the horse either; I traded it for a pig further down the road."

"Oh no, no!" exclaimed his wife, "that’s just what I would have done! Thank you, indeed! Now we can have pork in the house and something to offer guests like everyone else. What did we need a horse for? People might have said we became too grand to walk to church as we did before. Children, go put the pig in the sty!"

"But I don't have the pig either," replied Gudbrand; "further along, I exchanged it for a milk goat."

"Oh nein, how clever you are!" she shouted. "What did I need with a pig? People would just say we eat up everything we have. But now we have a goat; we can have both milk and cheese, and still keep the goat. Let the goat in, children!"

"I'm afraid I don't have the goat either," said Gudbrand; "further on the way, I traded the goat for a fine sheep."

"No!" she exclaimed, "you did it exactly as I would have wanted it; just as if I had been along myself. What did I need with a goat? I would have had to climb down hills and dales to fetch it. But I now have a sheep, so we'll get wool and clothes in the house, and even food. Go ahead and bring the sheep in, children!"

"But I don't have the sheep either," said Gudbrand, "because after a walk, I swapped it for a goose."

"Thank you for that," she said enthusiastically, "and many thanks too! What did I need with a sheep? I have neither wheel nor spindle, and I don't want to toil at creating clothes either; we can buy clothes just as before. Now I can have goose fat, which I've longed for, and feathers for my little pillow. Bring in the goose, children!"

"Well, I don't have the goose either," confessed Gudbrand, "I later swapped it for a rooster."

"God knows how you come up with these ideas!" she exclaimed, "it's all like I made the decision myself. A rooster! That's akin to having an eight-day clock, because every morning it crows at four, so we can now get up on time. What would we do with a goose? I can't prepare the goose fat, and my pillow I can fill with reeds if needed. Go let in the rooster, children!"

"But I don't have the rooster either," Gudbrand pointed out, "since I got really hungry, and sold it for twelve coins to save my life."

"Well, thank God, since you did that," shouted his wife, "everything you do seems just as I would wish. What would we have done with a rooster? We are our own masters and can sleep in as long as we want. Thank goodness, as long as I have you, who handles things so well, I don't need either rooster or goose, pigs or cows."

Gudbrand then opened the door. "Have I won the hundred dollars now?" he asked, and the neighbor had to admit that he did.