Once upon a time there was a poor couple whose home was a tumbledown hut far away in the forest. They lived from hand to mouth, and barely that. But sons they had, three of them, and the youngest was Ash-Lad, for he never did a thing but lie by the hearth and dig about in the ashes.

One day the eldest said he wanted to go out and find work. He was given leave at once, and off he went. He walked and he walked the whole day long, and as evening drew on he came to a king’s manor. There stood the King, out on the steps.

“Where are you off to?” asked the King.

“Oh, I’m just going round looking for work,” said the boy.

“Will you work for me and herd my seven colts?” said the King. “If you can herd them for a whole day and tell me in the evening what they eat and what they drink, you shall have the princess and half the kingdom. But if you can’t, I’ll cut three red strips out of your back.”

The boy thought that sounded like easy work. Seven colts? He’d manage that all right.

Next morning, as soon as it began to grow light, the Master of the Stables let the seven colts out. Off they went, and the boy after them, and you may be sure they didn’t dawdle: over hill and dale, through thicket and bog. When the boy had run like that a good while, he began to tire, and when he had kept it up a while longer, he’d had enough herding to last him a lifetime. Just then he came to a cleft in the mountain, and there sat an old hag with a distaff, spinning.

She saw him come panting after the colts with the sweat pouring off him, and she called out, “Come here, come here, my fine lad, and let me comb your hair!”

The boy asked for nothing better. He sat down beside her in the cleft, and she drew his head into her lap and combed and combed, while the colts vanished down the path and he lay there idling the whole day long.

Towards evening he wanted to leave. “I may as well trudge straight home,” he said. “There’s no point showing my face at the manor now.”

“Wait till dusk,” said the hag. “The colts will come past here on their way back to the King, and you can run home with them. Nobody need know you’ve been lying here all day instead of herding.”

When the colts came, she gave him a water flask and a tuft of moss. He was to show these to the King and say that this was what the seven colts ate and drank.

“Have you herded them well and truly all day?” asked the King, when the boy stood before him that evening.

“Oh yes, I have,” said the boy.

“Then you can tell me what my seven colts eat and drink?”

The boy held up the moss and the water flask. “There’s their food, and there’s their drink,” he said.

Then the King understood well enough what sort of herding that had been. He was so angry that he ordered the boy chased off the place that very minute. But first they were to cut three red strips out of his back and rub salt in.

You can imagine the state the boy was in when he got home. He had gone out to find work once, he said, and he would never do it again.

The next day the second son said he wanted to go out into the world and try his luck. His parents said no, and told him to take a good look at his brother’s back. But the boy wouldn’t give in, and at long last they let him go. At nightfall he came to the manor, and there stood the King on the steps again. The boy was offered the seven colts to herd, with the same reward and the same punishment as his brother, and he took the job on the spot. He would find out what those colts ate and drank, all right.

At first grey light the Master of the Stables let the colts out, and away they went over hill and dale, with the boy behind them. And it went with him just as it had with his brother. When he had run a long, long while and was hot and worn out, he came past the cleft where the hag sat spinning, and she called to him, “Come here, come here, my fine lad, and let me comb your hair!”

The boy had no objection to that. He let the colts run where they liked and sat down with the hag in the cleft. There he sat, and there he lay, and idle he was the whole day long.

When the colts came back towards evening, he too was given a tuft of moss and a flask of water to show the King. And when the King asked, “Can you tell me what my seven colts eat and drink?” he held them up and said, “There’s their food, and there’s their drink.”

Then the King flew into a rage again. Three red strips out of his back, salt in the wounds, and home with him that very minute. And when the second boy got home, he said the same as his brother: he had gone out to find work once, and never again.

On the third day Ash-Lad wanted to set off. He had a mind to try herding the seven colts too, he said.

The others laughed and made fun of him. “After the way it went for us, you’re going to manage it?” they said. “Oh yes, you look the type, you who’ve never done a thing but lie in the ashes and dig!”

“I’m going all the same,” said Ash-Lad. “I’ve got it into my head now.”

His brothers jeered and his parents begged, but it was no use. Off went Ash-Lad.

He walked all day and came to the manor at dusk. There stood the King on the steps. He always seemed to be standing there.

“Where are you off to?” he asked.

“I’m looking for work,” said Ash-Lad.

“And where are you from?” asked the King, for these days he wanted to know a little more before he took anybody on.

Ash-Lad told him where he came from, and that he was brother to the two who had herded the King’s seven colts. Then he asked if he might have a try at herding them the next day.

“Pah!” said the King, who grew angry just thinking about those two. “If you’re their brother, you won’t be worth much either. I’ve had my fill of your sort.”

“Well, now that I’ve come all this way,” said Ash-Lad, “I might as well be allowed a try.”

“Oh, if you’re so set on having the skin off your back, be my guest,” said the King.

“I’d sooner have the princess,” said Ash-Lad.

At first grey light the Master of the Stables let the seven colts out again, and away they went over hill and dale, through thicket and bog. But Ash-Lad had no intention of being left behind. He caught the nearest colt by the rump, gripped it with both hands and hung on, and away he went, hopping and leaping, his feet skidding through moss and mud.

When he had gone like that a good while, he came to the cleft as well. There sat the old hag at her spinning, and when she saw him, she raised her comb and called out, “Come here, come here, my fine lad, and let me comb your hair!”

“Kiss my behind, kiss my behind!” said Ash-Lad, and hopped and leapt and held on to the colt’s rump. The hag glared after him, and much good it did her.

When he was well past the cleft, the youngest colt said, “Climb up on my back, for we’ve a long way still to go.” And so he did.

They rode a long, long way.

“Do you see anything now?” asked the colt.

“No,” said Ash-Lad.

They rode a good way further.

“Do you see anything now?” asked the colt.

“Oh, no,” said Ash-Lad.

When they had ridden a long, long way again, the colt asked once more, “Do you see anything now?”

“Yes, now I think there’s something white over there,” said Ash-Lad. “It looks like a great big birch stump.”

“Yes, that’s where we’re going in,” said the colt.

When they reached the stump, the eldest colt took hold of it and wrenched it aside, and where it had stood there was a door. Inside was a little room, dim and smelling of earth, with hardly anything in it but a small hearth and a couple of stools. But behind the door hung a great rusty sword, and beside it a little jar.

“Can you swing the sword?” asked the colt.

Ash-Lad tried, but he couldn’t. So he had to take a swig from the jar, first once, then once more, and then once again, and after that the sword was no heavier in his hand than a willow switch.

“Now you must take the sword with you,” said the colt. “With it you shall cut off the heads of all seven of us on your wedding day, and then we’ll be princes again, as we were before. For we are the brothers of the princess you shall have when you can tell the King what we eat and drink. But a wicked troll has put a spell on us. When you’ve cut off our heads, you must take great care to lay each head by the tail of the body it belonged to. Then the troll’s spell will have no more power over us.”

Ash-Lad promised, and on they rode.

When they had gone a long, long way, the colt asked, “Do you see anything?”

“No,” said Ash-Lad.

They rode on a good while longer. “And now?” asked the colt. “Do you see anything now?”

“Oh, no,” said Ash-Lad.

Then they travelled many, many miles again, over hill and dale.

“Well now?” said the colt. “Don’t you see anything yet?”

“Yes,” said Ash-Lad. “Now I see something like a blue stripe, far, far away.”

“That’s a river,” said the colt. “We have to cross it.”

Over the river ran a long, handsome bridge, and when they had crossed it they travelled another long, long way. Then the colt asked again whether Ash-Lad could see anything. Yes, this time he could see something dark far off, like a church tower.

“Yes, that’s where we’re going in,” said the colt.

When the colts came into the churchyard, they turned into people and looked like king’s sons, in clothes so fine that they shone. Then they went into the church, and the priest who stood at the altar gave them bread and wine. Ash-Lad went in too. When the priest had laid his hands on the princes and given them the blessing, they went out of the church again, and so did Ash-Lad. But he took a bottle of wine and a communion wafer with him.

The moment the seven king’s sons came out into the churchyard, they turned into colts again. Ash-Lad climbed up on the youngest one’s back, and back they went the same way they had come, only much, much faster. First over the bridge, then past the stump, then past the hag who sat spinning in her cleft. They went so fast that Ash-Lad couldn’t make out what the hag was screeching after him, but he heard enough to know she was hopping mad.

It was nearly dark when they got back to the manor, and the King himself stood waiting in the yard.

“Have you herded them well and truly all day?” he said to Ash-Lad.

“I’ve done my best,” said Ash-Lad.

“Then you can tell me what my seven colts eat and drink?”

Ash-Lad brought out the communion wafer and the bottle of wine and showed them to the King. “There’s their food, and there’s their drink,” he said.

“Yes, you have herded them well and truly,” said the King, “and you shall have the princess and half the kingdom.”

So a wedding was made ready, and it was to be so grand and so splendid, said the King, that folk would hear of it and ask about it far and wide. But while they sat at the bridal table, the bridegroom got up. He had forgotten something down in the stable, he said, and he had to go and fetch it.

When he got down there, he did as the colts had told him. He cut off the heads of all seven, first the eldest and then the others according to their age. Then he knelt in the straw among them and took great care to lay each head by the tail of the colt it had belonged to. And as he did it, a bright glow spread through the stable, and one after another they turned into princes again.

When he came back to the bridal table with the seven princes behind him, the King was so overjoyed that he kissed Ash-Lad and clapped him on the back. And his bride was fonder of him than ever before.

“Half the kingdom you have already,” said the King, “and the other half you shall have when I’m dead. My sons can win lands and kingdoms for themselves, now that they’re princes again.”

And you may be sure there was joy and merriment at that wedding.

I was there too, but nobody had time to think of me. All I got was a slice of bread and butter, and I put it on the stove, and the bread burned and the butter ran, and I never got back so much as a crumb.