Once upon a time there was a king who had twelve daughters, and he loved them so dearly that he could hardly bear to have them out of his sight. But every day at noon, when the King lay down for his nap, the princesses went out for a walk. And one day, while the King was napping and the princesses were out walking, they vanished. All twelve at once. They never came back.

There was great sorrow throughout the land, and no one grieved more than the King. He sent word through his own kingdom and through every kingdom beyond it. He had their names read out in every church, and every church bell in the land rang for them. But the princesses were gone and stayed gone, and nobody could say what had become of them. So there was only one thing to think: the trolls had taken them into the mountain.

It wasn’t long before the news had travelled far and wide, from town to village and valley to valley and on into foreign lands, until it reached a king far, far away who had twelve sons. When the sons heard about the twelve princesses, they asked their father to let them go and search for them. He didn’t want to. He was afraid he would never see them again. But they went down on their knees before him, all twelve in a row, and begged and begged until at last he had to give in. He fitted out a ship for them and put Sir Red at the helm, for no one knew the sea better than Sir Red.

They sailed for a long, long time. They went ashore in every land they came to and searched and asked after the princesses, but they heard nothing and found nothing. When they had been at sea for seven years, all but a few days, a storm blew up so wild that they thought they would never see land again. Every man had to work, and not one of them got a wink of sleep for as long as it lasted. But on the third day the wind died, and all at once there wasn’t a ripple on the sea. By then they were so worn out that they fell asleep on the spot, in a heap on the deck. All but the youngest prince. There was no rest in him, and sleep wouldn’t come.

He was pacing up and down the deck when the ship drifted past a little rocky island, and on the shore a little dog was running back and forth, yelping and snarling at the ship. It wanted to come aboard; anyone could see that. The prince leaned over the rail and held out his hand, and called and whistled and coaxed, but the more he coaxed, the more the dog yelped and snarled.

It seemed a sin to leave it there to die. Most likely it had come from some ship that had been wrecked in the storm. But how was he to help it? He didn’t think he could get the boat into the water on his own, and the others were sleeping so soundly that he wasn’t going to wake them for the sake of a dog. Still, the sea lay calm and bright, and in the end he said to himself, “You’re going ashore all the same, and you’re saving that dog.” So he tried the boat, and it went into the water far more easily than he had expected.

He rowed to the island and walked up to the dog. But every time he reached for it, it jumped aside, and every time he followed, it jumped again, and so it went on until, before he knew what was happening, he was standing inside a great, splendid castle. There the dog turned into a lovely princess. And on the bench sat a man so huge and so ugly that the prince went cold all over.

“There’s no need to be frightened,” said the man.

His voice was even worse than his face, and the prince was twice as frightened as before.

“I know what you’re after,” the man went on. “There are twelve of you princes, and you’re looking for the twelve princesses who disappeared. Well, I know where they are. They’re with my master, the Troll King. There they sit, each on her own golden chair, picking the lice out of his hair, for he has twelve heads. You’ve been sailing for seven years, but you’ll sail for seven more before you find them.”

He looked the prince up and down.

“You could stay here and have my daughter,” he said. “But first you must kill him. He’s a hard master, and we’re sick and tired of him, every one of us. When he’s dead, I shall be king in his place.”

He nodded at the wall. “Now, let’s see if you can swing the sword.”

An old rusty sword hung there. The prince took hold of it, but he could barely rock it.

“Then you’d better have a swig from this bottle,” said the troll.

After one swig the prince could rock the sword. After two he could lift it. After three he could swing it about as lightly as a baker’s paddle.

“When you go back aboard,” said the troll, “hide the sword well in your bunk, so Sir Red doesn’t see it. He couldn’t swing it if he tried, that one, but he’ll hate you for it all the same, and he’ll be after your life.”

Then the troll told him what was to come.

“When the seven years are up, all but three days, it will go just as it went this time. A great storm will come over you, and when it’s past, you’ll all be sleepy. Then you must take the sword and row ashore. You’ll come to a castle with all sorts of guards outside it, wolves and bears and lions, but you mustn’t be afraid of them. They’ll all fall down at your feet. Inside you’ll find him sitting in a splendid chamber, dressed up in all his finery. Twelve heads he has, and the princesses sit each on her golden chair, each one picking the lice off one of his heads. You can imagine how they like that. Then you must be quick and cut off his heads, one after the other. If he wakes up and sees you, he’ll swallow you alive.”

The prince went back aboard with the sword and kept every word of it in his head. The others were still asleep. He hid the sword in his bunk, so that neither Sir Red nor anybody else set eyes on it. Soon after, the wind got up again, and he woke them all.

“Up you get,” he said. “You can’t lie here sleeping with a good wind like this.”

Nobody noticed he had been away.

When the seven years were up, all but three days, everything happened just as the troll had said. A great storm blew up and raged for three days, and when it was over, they were all so tired that they lay down to sleep. But the youngest prince took the sword and rowed ashore. The wolves and the bears and the lions all fell down at his feet, and so he came into the castle.

There, in a splendid chamber, the Troll King lay sprawled asleep on a great seat, decked out in all his finery, and around him the twelve princesses sat on their golden chairs, each with her fingers in the hair of one of his heads, picking for lice. The prince waved to the princesses to get out of the way. They pointed at the troll and waved back at him: go away, get out of here while you still can! But he kept on making signs to them to move, until at last they understood that he had come to save them. Then, quietly, one after another, they slipped aside, and as fast as they moved, the prince raised the sword and struck off the Troll King’s heads, one after the other, until the blood ran like a great brook.

When the troll was dead, the prince rowed back to the ship and hid the sword. He felt he had done his share now. He couldn’t get rid of the body on his own, and he thought the others might lend a hand. So he woke them up.

“Shame on you,” he said. “Lying here asleep, while I’ve found the princesses and saved them from the troll.”

The others only laughed.

“You’ve been asleep, same as us,” they said. “Sounder, if anything. You dreamed you were a hero.”

“If anybody saved the princesses,” said one of them, “it’s far more likely to have been one of us.”

But the youngest prince told them how it had all happened, and in the end they went ashore with him. First they saw the brook of blood, then the castle, then the troll and the twelve heads and the princesses, and then they had to admit that he had told the truth. They helped him heave the heads and the body into the sea.

Now everyone was happy, but none were happier than the princesses, who would never again have to sit picking lice off a troll all day long. Of all the gold and silver and precious things in the castle, they took as much as the ship could carry, and then they all went aboard, princes and princesses together.

But when they had sailed a good way out, the princesses remembered that in all their joy they had forgotten their golden crowns. The crowns were in a cupboard back at the castle, and the princesses did so want to have them. None of the others felt like going back. So the youngest prince said, “Oh, well. I’ve dared so much already, I may as well fetch the crowns too. Just take down the sails and wait till I come back.”

Yes, they would do that.

But when he had rowed so far that they could no longer see him, Sir Red spoke up. Sir Red would have liked nothing better than to be the greatest man aboard, and he wanted the youngest princess for himself.

“There’s no sense lying here waiting,” he said. “You can be sure that one won’t be coming back. And you all know your father gave me command of this ship, so I sail when I choose. When we get home, you’ll say it was I who saved the princesses. Anyone who says otherwise will lose his life.”

The princes didn’t dare do anything but what Sir Red wanted. So they sailed away.

Meanwhile the youngest prince had rowed ashore and gone up to the castle. He found the cupboard with the golden crowns, and he dragged it and heaved it and hauled it until he got it down into the boat. But when he rowed out to where he should have seen the ship, it was gone. He looked north and south and east and west, and there was no ship anywhere. Then he understood well enough what had happened. It was no use rowing after it. He had to turn round and row back to land.

He didn’t like the thought of spending the night alone in that castle, but there was no other roof to be had. So he plucked up his courage, locked every door and every gate, and lay down in a room where a bed stood ready made. But he was frightened, and after he had lain there a while he grew more frightened still, for the walls and the roof began to creak and crack and groan until he was sure the whole castle was about to split in two. Then all at once something came down beside the bed with a great soft thump, like a load of hay tipped off a cart.

After that, everything was still. Then a voice told him not to be afraid.

“I am Bird Dam, and I’ll get you out of this jam.”

“But first thing tomorrow, as soon as you wake,” the voice went on, “you must go to the storehouse and fetch me four barrels of rye. I must have them for my breakfast, or I can’t do a thing.”

When he woke, it was still grey outside, and beside the bed stood a bird far bigger than any bird has a right to be, with a feather at the back of its neck as thick as a young fir trunk. The prince went out to the storehouse, which stood on stilts at the edge of the courtyard, and fetched four barrels of rye, and Bird Dam ate every grain. Then it told him to hang the cupboard with the golden crowns on one side of its neck, and on the other side as much gold and silver as would balance it. Last of all he was to climb up on its back and hold on tight to the neck-feather.

The sun was just coming up when Bird Dam crouched low on the stone floor and the prince clung on with both hands. Then the bird sprang upward with a rush that sent dust and old straw whirling across the flagstones, and off they went, so fast that the air whistled past them.

It wasn’t long before they flew past the ship. The prince wanted to go aboard and fetch the sword, for he was afraid someone might find it, and the troll had said that must never happen. But Bird Dam said it would have to stay where it was.

“Sir Red won’t see it,” said the bird. “But if you go aboard, he’ll be after your life, for he wants the youngest princess. You needn’t worry about her, though. Every night she lays a naked sword in front of her in the bed.”

At long last they came to the troll, and the prince was made more welcome than words can tell. The troll couldn’t think of enough good things to do for him, now that the prince had killed his master and made him king. He would gladly have given him his daughter and half his kingdom besides. But the prince had grown so fond of the youngest of the twelve princesses that he couldn’t rest. Again and again he wanted to be off. The troll begged him to be patient a little longer; it would be nearly seven years before the ship got home. And about the princess, he said just what Bird Dam had said.

“You needn’t worry about her. She lays a naked sword in front of her in the bed. And if you don’t believe me,” said the troll, “go aboard when they sail past here and see for yourself. You can bring the sword back while you’re at it. I shall want it back anyway.”

When the ship came sailing by, there had been another storm, and when the prince climbed aboard, everyone was fast asleep. Each princess lay with her prince. But the youngest lay alone, with a naked sword in front of her in the bed, and on the floor in front of the bed lay Sir Red. The prince took the sword and rowed back to land, and not a soul knew he had been aboard.

Still the prince couldn’t settle, and he was forever wanting to be gone. At last, when the seven years were nearly over and there were only three weeks or so left, the troll said, “Well, you may as well get ready, since you won’t stay with us. You shall borrow my iron boat. It goes by itself; all you have to say is ‘Boat, go forward!’ In the boat there’s an iron club. When you see the ship straight ahead of you, lift the club a little, and they’ll get such a fair wind that they’ll forget to look out for you. When you come alongside, lift it again, and there’ll be such a storm that they’ll have better things to do than stare at you. And when you’re past them, lift it a third time. But always lay it down gently again, or there’ll be such weather that you’ll all go to the bottom, you and they together. When you reach land, don’t trouble yourself about the boat. Just push it out, turn it round and say, ‘Boat, go home the way you came!’”

When he left, he was given so much gold and silver and so many fine things, and so many clothes and so much linen that the troll’s daughter had sewn for him in all that long while, that he was far richer than any of his brothers.

He had hardly sat down in the boat and said “Boat, go forward!” before off it went. When he saw the ship straight ahead, he lifted the club, and they got such a fair wind that they forgot to look out for him. When he came alongside, he lifted it again, and such a storm blew up that the white foam stood round the ship and the waves came crashing over the deck, and they had better things to do than stare at him. And when he was past them, he lifted the club a third time, and then they had so much to do that nobody had a moment to wonder who he might be. Each time, he laid the club down as gently as an egg.

He reached land long, long before the ship. When he had got all his things out of the boat, he pushed it out again, turned it round and said, “Boat, go home the way you came!” And away it went.

Then he dressed himself up as a sailor and went to a wretched little hut where an old woman lived. He told her he was a poor seaman whose ship had gone down, and that he was the only one saved. Would she let him have a roof over his head, for himself and the few things he had rescued?

“Lord help us,” said the old woman. “I can’t take anyone in. You can see how it is here. I’ve nothing to lie on myself, and even less for anybody else.”

“That doesn’t matter,” said the sailor. “As long as I have a roof over my head, I don’t care what I lie on. You can hardly turn me away if I’m willing to take things as they are.”

That evening he carried his things in, and no sooner were they inside than the old woman, who loved nothing better than a bit of news to run about with, began to ask questions. Who was he? Where was he from? Where had he been, and where was he going? What had he got in all those bundles? What was his business? And had he heard anything of the twelve princesses who had vanished all those years ago? And a great deal more besides, enough to fill a long evening. But he said he was so knocked about, and his head ached so badly from all that dreadful weather, that he couldn’t make sense of anything. She must let him rest for a few days, until he had got over all that hard work, and then she should hear everything she wanted to know, and more.

The next day the old woman started asking and digging again. The sailor’s head still ached from the weather, and he couldn’t make sense of a thing, but somehow he let slip that he did know a little about the princesses. Off went the old woman at once with what she’d heard, to every gossip for miles around, and soon they came running, one after another, to ask about the princesses. Had he seen them? Were they coming soon? Were they on their way? The sailor kept complaining that his head was too bad to think straight. But this much he would say: if they hadn’t been lost in the storm, they would be home in a fortnight or so, perhaps sooner. Though he couldn’t swear they were still alive. He had seen them, right enough, but they might have gone to the bottom since.

One of the gossips hurried up to the King’s manor with the news. There was a sailor staying with such-and-such an old woman, she said, and he had seen the princesses, and they would be home in a fortnight, or maybe even in eight days. When the King heard that, he sent for the sailor to come and tell him himself.

“I can’t go before the King looking like this,” said the sailor. “I haven’t the clothes for it.”

But the King’s messenger said he must come all the same. The King wanted to speak to him and had to speak to him, however he looked, for no one else had brought him a single word about the princesses.

So the sailor went to the King’s manor and stood before the King, who asked him if it was true that he had seen the princesses.

“Yes, I have,” said the sailor. “But I can’t tell whether they’re still alive, for when I saw them, the weather was so bad that we were wrecked. But if they are alive, they’ll be here in a fortnight or so, and perhaps sooner.”

The King was nearly beside himself with joy. When the time drew near, he went down to the shore in all his finery to meet them, and there was great rejoicing all over the land when the ship came in with the princesses and the princes and Sir Red. But no one was happier than the old King, who had his daughters back again.

The eleven eldest princesses were happy and merry, too. But the youngest, who was to marry Sir Red, wept and was always sad. The King didn’t like it. Why couldn’t she be cheerful like her sisters? he asked. She had nothing to mope about, now that she was free of the troll and was going to have a fine man like Sir Red. But she didn’t dare say a word, for Sir Red had sworn to kill anyone who told how things had really happened.

One day, while the princesses sat sewing their wedding finery, in came a man in a great sailor’s coat with a peddler’s chest on his back. Would the princesses care to buy something fine for the wedding? he asked. He had so many rare and costly things, of gold and of silver. Well, they might, they said. They looked at his wares, and they looked at him, for they thought they knew him, and many of his things as well.

“Anyone who has so many fine things,” said the youngest princess, “must have something finer still. Something that would suit us even better.”

“That may well be,” said the peddler.

But her sisters hushed her and told her to remember what Sir Red had threatened.

Some time later the princesses were sitting at the window when along came the prince again, in the great sailor’s coat, bent double under the cupboard of golden crowns. He carried it into the great hall of the King’s manor, where the whole court had gathered and Sir Red stood among them, and there, in front of the princesses, he swung its doors open. The princesses crowded round, and each of them knew her own golden crown. Then the youngest stepped forward. There were tears in her eyes, but her voice was steady.

“I think it’s only right,” she said, “that the one who saved us should have the reward he has earned. And that isn’t Sir Red. It’s the man who brought us our golden crowns.” She pointed at him. “He saved us.”

Sir Red went as stiff as a mast. Then the prince threw off the sailor’s coat, and there he stood in the clothes the troll’s daughter had sewn for him, finer than any man in the hall. And the old King had Sir Red put to death.

Only then was there real joy at the King’s manor. Each prince took his own princess, and there was a wedding that was heard of and talked of across twelve kingdoms.