Once upon a time, there was a very poor widow who had only one son. She worked hard to provide for the boy until he was confirmed, but then she told him that she could no longer support him; he needed to go out into the world to earn his own living. So the boy went out into the world, and after traveling for a day or so, he met a stranger. "Where are you going?" the man asked. "I'm going out into the world to try to find work," the boy replied. "Would you like to work for me?" "Oh yes, I'd just as willingly work for you as for anyone else," the boy answered. "Well, you'll be comfortable with me," said the man, "you only need to keep me company and do nothing else." So the boy stayed with him and lived well with food and drink, and had little or nothing to do; but he also never saw anyone else visit the man.

One day, the man said to him, "I am now leaving for eight days; during that time you will be alone here, but you must not enter any of these four rooms. If you do, I will take your life when I return." "No," the boy said, he certainly would not do that. But after the man had been gone for three or four days, the boy could not resist and went into one of the rooms. He looked around but saw nothing except a shelf over the door with a thorn switch on it. This was certainly something to forbid so strictly, thought the boy. When the eight days were up, the man came home again. "You haven't been inside any of the rooms?" he said. "No, I haven't at all," the boy replied. "Well, we shall soon see," and with that, he went into the room the boy had been in. "Yes, you have been here after all," he said, "and now you shall lose your life." The boy wept and pleaded for his life, and so he was spared, but he got a good thrashing. When that was over, they were good friends again.

A while later, the man left again; this time, he would be gone for fourteen days, but first, he told the boy not to set foot in any of the rooms he hadn't already been in; for the one he had been in, he was free to enter again. Again, it went just like the last time, except that the boy now stayed out of it for eight days. In that room, he also saw nothing except a shelf over the door, with a stone and a water jug on it. That was certainly something to be so scared over too, the boy thought. When the man returned home, he asked if the boy had been in any of the rooms. No, he had not been any place whatsoever. "Well, we'll soon see," the man said, and when he saw that the boy had been there after all, he said, "Now I will not spare you any longer, now you shall lose your life!" But the boy wept and pleaded again, and so he was spared, but once again he was thrashed so thoroughly that it nearly got the better of him. But when he recovered, he lived just as well as before, and he and the man were just as good friends.

Some time after, the man had to travel once more and would be away for three weeks. He told the boy that if he went into the third room, he shouldn't think he'd keep his life. After fourteen days had passed, the boy couldn't help himself; he sneaked in but saw absolutely nothing there, except a trapdoor in the floor. When he lifted it and peeked through, there was a large copper cauldron simmering and boiling down below, but he saw no fire underneath. It would be amusing to see if it is hot, the boy thought, and he dipped his finger into it; when he pulled it out again, it was gold-plated all over. The boy scraped and washed it, but the gilding wouldn't come off; so he wrapped a rag around it, and when the man returned home and asked what was wrong with his finger, the boy said he had cut himself badly. But the man tore off the rag, and when he saw what was wrong with the boy's finger, at first he wanted to kill him; but when the boy cried and pleaded again, he only thrashed him so that the boy lay in bed for three days. He took down a jar from the wall and smeared it on, and the boy got well again.

Sometime later, the man traveled again and was to be gone for a month. But then he told the boy that if he went into the fourth room, he must never again think of keeping his life. For two or three weeks, the boy restrained himself, but then he couldn't help it again; he had to go into the room, and so he slipped in. There stood a large black horse tied to a manger, with a glowing trough at its head and a hay rack at its tail. The boy thought it was strange; he switched the hay rack to its head. Then the horse said, "Since you have such a kind heart that you wish to feed me, then I shall save you. If the troll comes home now and finds you, he will kill you. But now you must go up to the room that is directly above here, and take armor from those hanging there; and you absolutely mustn't take any of the shining ones, but the rustiest you see, that's the one you must take; and sword and saddle you must pick out in the same manner." The boy did so, but it was difficult for him to carry it all. When he returned, the horse said that now he should strip naked and go down into the cauldron, which stood boiling in the other room, and bathe well there. I will indeed look terrible, the boy thought, but he did it nonetheless. When he had bathed, he became as handsome and healthy, and as red and white as milk and blood and much stronger than before.

"Do you notice any change?" the horse asked. "Yes," said the boy. "Try to lift me," said the horse. Oh yes, he could do that, and the sword he swung like nothing. "Now saddle me," said the horse, "and put on the armor; take the thorn switch and the stone and the water flask and the ointment jar, and we shall go." When the boy was well up on the horse, it went off, and he didn't know how he arrived. He had been riding for a while when the horse said, "I think I hear a rumbling. Look around, can you see anything?" "There are many, many coming after us, probably twenty or so," the boy said. "Yes, it's the troll that," said the horse, "now he comes with his." They rode a while further until those who were following them began to close in. "Now throw the thorn switch over your shoulder," said the horse, "but throw it well and far from me!" The boy did so, and at the same time, a thick, dense thorny forest grew behind them. So they rode again a long way while the troll had to go home for something to chop through the forest with.

But after a while, the horse said again, "Look back, can you see anything now?" "Yes, a great many," said the boy, "like a large crowd leaving a church." "Yes, it's the troll that; now he has more with him. Now throw the stone, but throw it well and far from me!" As soon as the boy did as the horse had said, a huge, huge cliff rose behind them. So the troll had to go home for something to cut through the rock with, and while he did that, the boy rode again a good distance forward. But then the horse asked him to look back again, and he saw them teaming like a war army; they were so shiny it gleamed from them. "Yes," said the horse, "it's the troll; now he has all his with him. Now spill the water flask behind you, but be careful not to spill any on me!" The boy did as instructed, but somehow a drop got on the horse's loin. So a vast, vast body of water appeared, but from the drops he spilled, the horse ended up deep in the water; nevertheless, it swam to shore. When the trolls came to the water, they lay down to drink it dry, and they drank until they burst. "Now we are rid of them," said the horse.

After they had traveled for a long, long time, they came to a green clearing in a forest. "Now undress from all the armor and just put on your ragged clothes," said the horse; "then take the saddle off me and release me, and hang everything inside this great hollow linden tree here. Then you shall make yourself a wig from lichen and go up to the king's manor, which is nearby; there you must ask for work. When you need me, just come here and shake the bridle, and I shall come to you." Yes, the boy did as the horse had said, and when he put on the lichen wig, he became so despicable, pale, and ragged-looking that no one could recognize him. He then went to the king's manor and first asked to work in the kitchen, carrying water and wood to the cook. But then the kitchen maid asked, "Why do you wear that ugly wig? Take it off; I don't want anyone that ugly here inside." "I can't," the boy answered, "I have scalp problems." "Do you think I'll want you here near the food, if that's the case?" said the cook; "go to the stable master, you are best suited for mucking the stable."

But when the stable master asked him to take off the wig, he got the same reply, and he didn't want to have him either. "You can go to the gardener," he said, "you're best suited for digging in the dirt." The gardener allowed him to stay, but none of the other servants wanted to room with him; therefore, he had to sleep under the steps to the summerhouse, which stood on stilts with a high staircase. Under it, he got some moss for a bed, and he lay there as best as he could. After he had been at the king's manor for a while, it happened one morning, just as the sun rose, that the boy had taken off the lichen wig and was washing himself; and he was so handsome that it was a delight to see him. The princess saw the handsome gardener from her window and thought she had never seen anyone so beautiful. She then asked the gardener why he was lying out under the stairs. "Oh, none of the servants want to room with him," said the gardener. "Let him come up tonight and lie by the door inside my chamber, and surely, then, they won't think themselves too good to have him indoors with them," said the princess. The gardener told the boy. "Do you think I would do that?" the boy said, "then they would say there was something between me and the princess." "Yes, you have good reason to fear that," said the gardener, "you who are so handsome." "Well, well, if you command it, I shall do it," the boy said.

When he was going up the stairs that evening, he thumped and climbed so noisily that they begged him to go quietly, so the king wouldn't find out. He came in and lay down, and began to snore loudly. Then the princess said to her maid, "Sneak over and take off his lichen wig," and so she did; but just as she was about to pull it, he held onto it with both hands, saying she certainly couldn't have it. With that, he lay down and began to snore again. The princess gave her maid a sign, and finally, she managed to pull off the wig; there lay the boy as lovely and red and white as he had been seen in the morning sun. From then on, the boy lay every night in the princess' chamber. But it wasn't long before the king heard that the gardener lay in the chamber with the princess every night, and he was so furious that he nearly had the boy executed. He didn't do that, but he threw him into the dungeon, and his own daughter was locked inside her chamber, so she was never allowed out, neither day nor night. No matter how much she cried and pleaded for herself and the boy, it didn't help; the king only became angrier about it.

Some time after, war and unrest arose in the land, and the king had to arm himself against another king who wanted to take the kingdom from him. When the boy heard about it, he asked the jailer to go to the king on his behalf and ask for armor and sword and permission to join the war. All the others laughed when the jailer expressed his request and asked the king that he might get some old rusty armor, so they could have the entertainment of seeing the poor fellow in battle. That's what he got, and also an old miserable nag, that limped on three legs, dragging the fourth behind it. So they set out against the enemy; but they weren't far from the manor before the boy got stuck in a bog with his nag. There he sat, nodding and bowing: "Come on, get up! Come on, get up!" he said to the nag. All the others found great amusement in it, laughing and mocking the boy as they rode past. But no sooner had they gone, then he leapt to the linden tree, donned the armor, and shook the bridle; immediately the horse came and said, "You do your best, and I'll do mine!" When the boy arrived at the battle, it had already begun, and the king was in grave danger; but just as it got most desperate, the boy had driven the enemy far away. The king and his men wondered greatly who it could be that came and helped them; but no one got close enough to him to speak, and as soon as the battle was over, he was gone.

As they returned, the boy still sat in the bog, nodding and shaking on the three-legged nag. Then they laughed again. "Oh look, that fool is still sitting there!" they said. The second day they rode out, the boy sat there again; they laughed and mocked him once more; but no sooner had they ridden past, then he jumped to the linden tree, and everything happened just like the previous day. Everyone marveled at who the unknown hero helping them might be; but no one guessed it was the boy, of course.

As they were riding home that evening and saw the boy sitting on the nag still, they laughed at him again, and someone shot an arrow at him, hitting him in the leg. He started to yell and carry on so terribly that the king brought him his handkerchief to tie around himself. The third morning when they set out, the boy sat in the bog again. "Come on, get up! Come on, get up!" he said to the nag. "No, no! He'll sit there until he starves," said the king's men as they rode past, laughing at him so hard they were about to fall off their horses.

Once they were gone, he jumped to the linden tree and came after to the battle, just as it was at its peak. That day, he killed the enemy king, ending the war on the spot. When the battle was over, the king saw his handkerchief tied around the unknown warrior's leg, and he easily recognized him; they then took him with great joy to the manor, and the princess, who saw him from her window, was so delighted you wouldn't believe it: "There comes my sweetheart indeed!" she said. He then took the ointment jar and smeared himself on the leg, and then all the wounded, and they all were healed immediately.

He then married the princess; but when he went down to the stable to see the horse on the day the wedding was to be, it stood there so sullen, hanging its ears, and wouldn't eat at all. When the young king—because now he had become a king and received half the kingdom—spoke to him and asked what was wrong, the horse said: "Now I have helped you advance, and now I no longer wish to live. Now you must take the sword and cut my head off." "No, I will certainly not do that," said the young king; "but you shall have whatever you desire, and stand still forevermore." "Yes, if you don't do as I say, I will know how to take your life," said the horse. So the king had to do it; but when he raised the sword and was about to strike, he was so troubled that he had to turn his face away because he didn't want to see the blow; but no sooner had he cut the head off than there stood the most handsome prince where the horse had stood.

"Where on earth did you come from?" asked the king. "It was I who was the horse," replied the prince. "I was once a king in the land that the king you killed in the battle yesterday was from; he was the one who cast the troll spell on me and sold me to the troll. Since he is now dead, I regain my kingdom, and you and I shall be neighboring kings; but we will surely never go to war against each other." And indeed, they did not; they remained friends for as long as they lived, and they often visited each other.