The Widow's Son.

Once upon a time, there was a very poor widow who had only one son. She toiled hard for the boy until he had been confirmed, but then she told him that she could no longer support him; he would have to go out and earn his own bread. So the boy set out into the world, and after he had been walking for a day or so, he met a stranger. "Where are you headed?" asked the man. "I'm going out into the world to try to find service," said the boy. "Do you want to serve me?" "Oh yes, just as well for you as for anyone else," replied the boy. "Yes, you shall be well off with me," said the man; "you just need to keep me company and do nothing else." So the boy stayed with him and lived well with food and drink, and had little to nothing to do, but he never saw another soul with the man. One day the man said to him: "Now I'm going away for eight days; during that time you'll be here alone, but you must not go into any of these four rooms. If you do, I'll take your life when I return." No, said the boy, he certainly wouldn't. But after the man had been gone for three or four days, the boy could no longer hold himself back and went into one of the rooms. He looked around but saw nothing except a shelf over the door with a whip made of rose shoots. This was something to forbid me from seeing so strictly, thought the boy.

When the eight days were over, the man returned home. "You haven't been in any of the rooms, have you?" he asked.

"No, I haven't," said the boy.

"Yes, I'll soon see about that," and with that he went into the room the boy had been in. "Yes, you have been here nonetheless," he said, "and now you'll lose your life."

The boy cried and pleaded for himself, and so he was spared his life but received a good lashing. When it was over, they were as good friends as before.

Some time later, the man went away again; this time he would be gone for fourteen days, but first, he told the boy that he must not set foot in any of the rooms he hadn't already been in; the one he had been in, he could enter again if he wished. Yes, it went just the same as last time, except the boy now managed to restrain himself from going in for eight days. In that room, he saw nothing but a shelf over the door with a stone and a water jug on it. This is something to be so afraid of too, thought the boy again.

When the man came home, he asked if the boy had been in any of the rooms. No, he said; the boy hadn't been there.

"Yes, I'll soon see about that," said the man, and when he saw he had indeed been there, he said: "Well, I won't spare you any longer, now you will lose your life!"

But the boy cried and pleaded for himself again, and so he was spared with just a beating, but it was a hard one, so much that he could bear it. But when he recovered, he lived just as well as before, and he and the man were as good friends.

A while later, the man needed to travel again, and now he would be gone for three weeks, and he told the boy that if he entered the third room, he should not think of living anymore. After fourteen days, the boy could not help himself and sneaked in; but he saw nothing there except a trapdoor on the floor. When he lifted it and looked down, he saw a large copper kettle bubbling and boiling below; but he saw no fire under it. It would be fun to know if it's hot, thought the boy, and dipped his finger in it; when he pulled it out, it was gilded all over. The boy scraped and washed it, but the gilding wouldn't come off; so he wrapped a cloth around it, and when the man returned and asked what was wrong with his finger, the boy said he had cut it bad. But the man tore off the cloth, and then he saw well what had happened to the finger. At first, he wanted to kill the boy; but when he cried and begged again, he just beat him such that he was bedridden for three days. Then he took a jar down from the wall and anointed him with it, so the boy became healthy again.

After some time, the man left once more, and he wouldn't be back for a month. But then he told the boy that if he went into the fourth room, he must never think of keeping his life. Two or three weeks passed, but then the boy couldn't hold back anymore; he had to and would enter the chamber, and so he sneaked in. There stood a large black horse on a tether, with a glowing trough by its head and a hay basket by its tail. The boy thought it was strange; he switched them around and placed the hay basket by its head.

Then the horse said: "Since you have such a good heart and will let me have food, I shall save you. If the troll comes home now and finds you, he'll kill you. But now go up to the room directly above this, and take an armor from those hanging there; but you must absolutely not take any of the shiny ones, take the rustiest you see; and sword and saddle you should choose the same way."

The boy did as instructed; but it was heavy for him to carry it all.

When he returned, the horse said that now he should strip naked and go into the kettle boiling in the other room and bathe well there. I will look dreadful then, thought the boy, but he did it anyway. After he had bathed, he became so beautiful and handsome, and as red and white as milk and blood, and much stronger than before.

"Do you notice any change?" asked the horse.

"Yes," said the boy.

"Try to lift me," said the horse.

Oh yes, he could, and he swung the sword like it was nothing.

"Yes, now put the saddle on me," said the horse, "and put on the armor, take the whip and the stone and water flask and the ointment jar, and then we will ride."

Once the boy was on the horse, they went off so fast, he didn't know how he got there.

After they had ridden for a while, the horse said: "I think I hear a noise. Look back, can you see anything?"

"There are many, many behind us, surely a score," said the boy.

"Yes, that's the troll," said the horse, "now he's coming with his."

They rode further until those coming after began to close in on them.

"Now throw the thorn whip over your shoulder," said the horse; "but throw it well and far from me!"

The boy did as told, and a thick thorn forest grew up there immediately.

So the boy rode for a long, long stretch, while the troll had to go home for something to chop through the forest with.

But after a while, the horse said again: "Look back, can you see anything now?"

"Yes, a whole multitude," said the boy, "like a great church congregation."

"Yes, that's the troll; now he has more with him. Now throw the stone, but throw it well and far from me!"

As soon as the boy did as the horse had said, a large, large mountain appeared behind them. So the troll had to go back for something to hew his way through the mountain with, and while the troll did that, the boy rode on a good distance.

But then the horse asked him to look back again, and when he did, he saw it swarming like a whole army; they were so bright that they shone. "Yes," said the horse, "that's the troll; now he has all his with him. Now pour the water flask behind you, but mind you don't spill anything on me!" The boy did so; but somehow, he managed to spill a drop on the horse's haunch. Then a great, great lake formed, but from the drops he spilled, the horse ended up far out in the water; still, it swam to land. When the trolls reached the water, they lay down to drink it dry, and they drank so much that they burst.

"We're rid of them now," said the horse.

After traveling for a long, long time, they came to a green clearing in a forest. "Now take off the whole armor and just put on your tattered clothes," said the horse; "then take the saddle off me and let me go, and hang everything inside this hollow linden tree here. Then you must make yourself a wig of spruce moss and go up to the royal court, which is nearby; there you should ask for service. When you need me, just come here and shake the bridle, and I shall come to you."

Yes, the boy did as the horse instructed, and when he put on the moss wig, he looked so shabby and pale and wretched, that no one could recognize him. He came to the royal court and first asked to stay in the kitchen to carry water and wood for the cook.

But then the kitchen maid asked: "Why do you have that ugly wig? Take it off, I don't want to see anyone so nasty in here."

"I can't," replied the boy, "I'm not quite clean in the head."

"Do you think I want you here with the food when you're like that?" said the cook; "go down to the stable master, you're better suited to muck out the stables."

But when the stable master asked him to remove the wig, he got the same answer, and so he didn't want him either; "you can go to the gardener," he said, "you're best suited to dig in the earth."

With the gardener, he was allowed to stay; but none of the other servants wanted to sleep with him; so he had to sleep by himself under the steps to the summerhouse; it stood on stilts and had a high staircase. Under there he got some moss for a bed, and there he lay as best he could.

After he had been at the royal court for a while, it happened one morning, just as the sun was rising, that the boy had taken off the moss wig and was standing washing himself; and he was so beautiful, it was a delight to see him.

The princess saw from her window the handsome gardener's boy, and she thought she had never seen anyone so beautiful. She then asked the gardener why he slept under the steps.

"Oh, none of the servants will sleep with him," said the gardener.

"Let him come up tonight and sleep by the door inside my chamber, then they will not hold themselves too good to let him stay in the house afterwards," said the princess.

The gardener told the boy.

"Do you mean I should do that?" said the boy; "then they would say there's something between me and the princess."

"Yes, you have reason to be afraid of that you," replied the gardener, "you who are so handsome."

"Well, well, if you insist, then I suppose I must," said the boy.

When he was going up to the stairway in the evening, he trampled and clattered so much that they had to ask him to walk softly, so the king wouldn't find out. He entered and lay down, and immediately began to snore. Then the princess said to her maidservant: "Sneak over and take off his moss wig," and she did; but as soon as she tried to grab it, he held on with both hands and said she wouldn't get it. With that, he lay back and snored again. The princess gave the maidservant a sign, and she managed to tear off the wig; then the boy lay there so delightful and red and white, just as the princess had seen him in the morning sun. Afterwards, the boy lay every night in the princess's room.

But it didn't take long before the king heard that the gardener's boy lay in the princess's chamber every night, and he became so enraged that he almost had the boy killed. He didn't do that, however, but threw him in the dungeon, and his own daughter he locked in her chamber, so she was never allowed to come out, neither day nor night. No matter how much she cried and pleaded for herself and the boy, it didn't help; the king only grew angrier.

A while later, there came war and strife in the land, and the king had to arm himself against another king who wanted to take the kingdom from him. When the boy heard about it, he asked the jailer to go to the king on his behalf and ask for armor and a sword and permission to join the battle. Everyone else laughed when the jailer stated his case and asked the king to give him some old junk for armor, so they could have the fun of seeing the poor soul in the war. He got this, and also an old nag that limped on three legs, dragging the fourth one behind.

So they set off against the enemy; but they weren't far from the castle before the boy got stuck in a bog with his nag. There he sat, jerking and nodding: "Hey, will you get up! Hey, will you get up!" he said to the nag. Everyone else had their fun with it and laughed and mocked the boy as they rode past. But as soon as they were gone, he leaped to the linden, put on his armor, and shook the bridle; immediately, the horse came and said: "Do your best, and I'll do mine!" When the boy caught up, the battle had already begun, and the king was in a bad way; but in no time, the boy had driven the enemy a long way off.

The king and his men marveled at who this stranger could be that came to help them; but no one came close enough to speak with him, and when the battle was over, he was gone. As they returned, the boy still sat in the bog, nodding on the three-legged nag. They laughed again. "Look there, the fool still sits!" they said. The next morning they rode out, the boy still sat there; they laughed again and mocked him; but as soon as they rode past, he leaped to the linden, and everything went on as the day before. Everyone wondered who this foreign warrior was who had helped them; but no one came close enough to speak with him; and indeed no one suspected the boy, of course.

When they returned in the evening and saw the boy still sitting on the nag, they again laughed him off, and one shot an arrow at him and hit him in the leg. He began to scream and carry on, so it was awful; so the king threw his handkerchief to him, so he could tie it on.

The third morning they set out, the boy sat in the bog again. "Hey, will you get up! Hey, will you get up!" he said to the nag.

"No, no! He'll sit there until he starves to death," said the king's men as they rode past, laughing at him so much they almost fell off their horses.

Once they were gone, he leaped to the linden and caught up to the battle just where it counted. That day he killed the enemy king, so the war was ended immediately.

When the battle was over, the king saw his handkerchief which the stranger had tied on his leg, and so he could easily recognize him; they took him with great joy back to the royal court, and the princess, who saw him from her window, became so happy you could never imagine: "There's my love!" she said. He then took the ointment jar and smeared it on his own leg and then on all the wounded, and they were all healed instantly.

So he married the princess; but on the day the wedding was to take place, when he went down to the stable to the horse, it stood there so glum and hanging its ears, and wouldn't eat at all. When the young king—because by then he had become king and had received half the kingdom—spoke to it and asked what was wrong, the horse said: "I have helped you rise, and now I don't want to live any longer. Now you must take the sword and cut off my head."

"No, I certainly won't do that," said the young king; "but you shall have whatever you want, and stand still forever."

"Yes, if you don't do as I say, I'll find a way to take your life," said the horse.

So the king had to do it; but just as he raised the sword to strike, he was so troubled that he had to turn his face away, not wanting to see the blow; but no sooner had he cut off the head, than the most beautiful prince stood where the horse had stood.

"Where in the world did you come from?" asked the king.

"It was I who was the horse," answered the prince. "I was once king in the land from which the king you killed in yesterday's battle came; it was he who cast a troll disguise on me and sold me to the troll. Now that he is dead, I regain my kingdom, and you and I will be neighboring kings; but we shall never go to war against each other."

And they didn't either; they were friends as long as they lived, and each often visited the other.