10. Some wives are like that.

Once upon a time, there was a man and a woman who needed to sow; but they had no seed and no money to buy it. They had only one cow, and the man was to go to town and sell it to get money for seed. But when it came to the crunch, the wife dared not let the man go, for she was afraid he would drink up the money. So she went herself with the cow and also took a hen. Close to the city, she met a butcher. "Are you going to sell that cow, mother?" he asked. "Yes, I will," she said. "What will you have for it then?" "I guess I'll have a mark for the cow, but the hen will be ten dollars," she said. "Yes," he replied, "I don't need the hen, and you'll get rid of it when you get to the city; but for the cow, I'll give you a mark." She sold her cow and got her mark, but there was nobody in the city who would give ten dollars for a scabby dry hen. So she went back to the butcher again and said, "I can't get rid of the hen, father! You'll have to take that too, you who were attached to the cow." "We'll work it out," said the butcher, invited her to the table and gave her food, and poured her so much spirits that she became drunk and lost both sense and collection. While she slept it off, the butcher dipped her in a tar barrel and put her in a feather pile. When she woke up, she was tarred all over and began to wonder: "Is it me, or isn't it me? Nah, it can never be me, it must be a big strange bird. But how should I go about knowing if it's me or if it's not me? Well, I know how I can tell if it's me: if the calves lick me, and the dog doesn't bark at me when I get home, then it's me." The dog barely saw such a monster before it started barking a storm, as if there were both thieves and villains on the farm. "Nah, it probably isn't me," she said. When she came to the barn, the calves wouldn't lick her because they recognized the smell of tar. "Nah, it's not me, it must be a strange bird," she said. She then climbed up the storehouse roof, began to flap her arms as if they were wings, and wanted to go air. When the man saw this, he came out with the rifle and started aiming. "Oh don't shoot, don't shoot!" the woman cried, "it's me." "If it's you," said the man, "don't stand there like a goat, but come down and account for yourself." She crawled back down, but had not a single penny, for the mark she got from the butcher, she had thrown away in drunkenness; and when the man heard that, he said, "You are no more than once as mad as you have been," and he got so angry that he said he would go his way from everything and never come back if he didn't meet three other wives who were as mad. He ambled off, and when he had come a ways down the road, he saw a woman running in and out with an empty strainer in a newly built house. Every time she ran in, she threw the apron over the strainer as if she had something in it, and dumped it on the floor. "Why, do you! that, mother?" he asked. "Oh, I just want to bring in some sun," she answered; "but I don't know what it is: when I'm out, I have the sun in the strainer, but when I come in, I have thrown it away. When I was in my old house, I had plenty of sun, even though I never took in the least; if only someone could bring me sun, I would gladly give him three hundred dollars. "Do you have an axe," said the man, "then I can get you the sun." He got an axe and cut out windows, for the carpenters had forgotten that; instantly the sun came in, and he got his three hundred dollars. That was one, thought the man, and started walking again. After a while he came outside a house, and there was a terrible scream and squabble. He went inside and saw a woman about to smack her husband in the head with a mallet; over his head she had pulled a shirt that had no neck hole. "Do you want to kill your husband, mother?" he asked. "No," she said, "I just want a hole in the neck of this shirt." The man screamed and carried on and said, "God comfort and support anyone who has to get a new shirt on! If anyone could teach my wife how to get a hole in the neck of the shirt in another way, I would gladly give him three hundred dollars. “This will soon be done, just bring a pair of scissors,” said the other. He got a pair of scissors, cut a hole, and went further ahead with his money. That was the second one, he said to himself. Eventually he came to a farm; there he thought to rest for a while and went in. Where are you from, father?" asked the woman. "I'm from Ringerike," he replied. "Oh no, no! Are you from heaven? Then you must know him Per Anden, my blessed husband then? The woman had been married three times; the first and the last husband were nasty, so she believed that only the second one had been saved, because he had been a nice man. "Yes, I know him well," said he who was wandering. "How is he doing now then?" asked the woman. "Oh, he's poor," said the Ringeriker, "he's hanging around there and has neither food nor clothes on his body, money is no use to him.” "God have mercy on me for him then!" cried the woman; "he didn't have to go so wretched, he who was left with so much; here hangs a large attic full of clothes that belonged to him, and a large chest with money stands here too. If you take that with you, you can have a horse and cart to drive it forward with; and he can have the horse there, and he can sit on the cart and drive around intermittently, for he doesn't have to walk.” The Ringeriker got a whole cart load with clothes and a chest filled with shiny silver money, and as much food and drink as he wanted; once he had that, he got on and drove his way. That was the third one, he said to himself. But out in the field was the woman's third husband plowing, and when he saw a stranger leaving with horse and equipment, he went home and asked the woman, what was it for one who ran off with the blue horse. "Oh, him," she said, "That was a man from heaven; he said it is so wretched with him Per Anden, my blessed husband, that he goes around there and has neither clothes nor money; so I sent with him all these old clothes that hung here after him, and the old chest with the silver money in it.” The man instantly understood where this was going, saddled a horse, and bolted off at full speed. It didn't take long before he was close behind him who sat on the cart and drove; but when the other one noticed it, he drove the horse and cart into the small forest, took a handful of horsehair from the horse, and then he jumped up on a hill, where he tied the horsehair fast to a birch, and underneath it he started to stare and peer up into the clouds. "No, no, no!" he said, as if to himself, as Per Third came riding, "no, now I've never seen such a oddity! no, now I've never seen the like!" Per stood and looked at him for a while, and wondered if he was mad, or what this was supposed to be; finally he asked: "What are you lying there and gawking at?" "No, never have I seen the like!" said the other one, "there goes one straight up to heaven with a blue horse; here you see the hair hanging in the birch, and up there in the clouds you see his blue horse." Per looked at the clouds and at him, and said: "I don't see anything other than the horsehair in the birch I." "No, you can't see it either, where you stand," said the other, "but come here and lie down, and stare straight up, and then you mustn't turn your