Kari Woodpile.

Once upon a time, there was a King who had become a widower. After his Queen, he had a daughter who was so kind and beautiful that none could be kinder or more beautiful. He grieved for a long time over the Queen, whom he had loved dearly, but eventually, he grew tired of living alone and married a widowed Queen who also had a daughter. However, her daughter was as ugly and mean as the other was kind and lovely. The stepmother and her daughter were jealous of the King's daughter because she was so beautiful; but as long as the King was home, they dared not do anything to her because he loved her very much.

Time passed, and then the King went to war with another King and left with his army. The Queen thought she could do whatever she wanted now, so she both starved and beat the King's daughter and chased her around every corner. Eventually, she thought everything was too good for her and set her to tend the cattle. She went with the cattle into the woods and up the mountains. She received little or no food, became pale and thin, and almost always cried and was sad. Among the cattle was a huge blue ox that was always so sleek and shiny, and it often came to the King's daughter and let her stroke it. One day, as she sat crying and was sad again, the ox came to her and asked why she was so sorrowful. She said nothing but kept on crying. "Yes," said the ox, "I know why, even if you won't tell me; you cry because the Queen is mean to you and wants to starve you to death. But you don't need to worry about food; in my left ear there is a cloth, and when you take and spread it out, you can get as many dishes as you want." She did this, took the cloth, and spread it out on the grass, and it then laid out the most delicious dishes anyone could wish for; there was wine, mead, and sweet cakes. She soon regained her health and became so rosy, plump, and fair that the Queen and her dry, skinny daughter became blue and pale with envy. The Queen couldn't understand how the stepdaughter could look so good on such poor fare; so she told a maid to follow her into the woods and see how it was all arranged because she suspected that some of the servants were giving her food. The maid did follow her and watched, and she saw the stepdaughter take the cloth out of the blue ox's ear and spread it out, and then the cloth served up the most delicious dishes, which the stepdaughter enjoyed. The maid went home and told the Queen.

Now the King came home, victorious over the other King he had been at war with; there was great joy throughout the castle, and no one was happier than the King's daughter. But the Queen feigned illness and gave the doctor a lot of money to say she could not recover unless she ate the meat of the blue ox. Both the King's daughter and the people asked the doctor if nothing else could help and pleaded for the ox because everyone loved it and said there was no other ox like it in the whole kingdom; but no, it had to be slaughtered, there was no other remedy. When the King's daughter heard this, she was upset and went down to the cowshed to the ox. It stood there hanging its head and looked so sorrowful that she began to cry over it.

"Why are you crying?" said the ox.

She then said that the King had come home again, and the Queen had taken to her bed, and got the doctor to say she couldn't get better unless she ate the meat of the blue ox, and now it was to be slaughtered.

"If they take my life, they'll soon kill you too," said the ox; "if you think like I do, we'll leave tonight."

Yes, the King's daughter thought it was hard to leave her father; but it was even worse to live in the same house with the Queen, so she promised the ox she would come. In the evening, when everyone else had gone to bed, the King's daughter sneaked down to the cowshed to the ox; it took her on its back and galloped away as fast as it could. By daybreak, when the people came to slaughter the ox, it was gone, and when the King came to ask after his daughter, she was also missing. He sent messengers in all directions to search for them and announced it from the church hill, but no one had seen anything of them.

Meanwhile, the ox carried the King's daughter through many countries, and they came to a large copper forest; the trees, branches, leaves, flowers, everything was of copper.

Before they entered the forest, the ox said to the King's daughter, "When we get into the forest, take care that you don't touch even a leaf; otherwise, it's over for both of us, for here lives a troll with three heads who owns it."

Oh dear, she would be very careful and not touch anything.

She was so cautious, bending away from the branches and pushing them aside with her hands; but the forest was so dense that it was almost impossible to pass, and no matter how she managed, she still snagged a leaf in her hand.

"Ouch, ouch, what have you done now?" said the ox, "it's now a fight to the death. But just be sure to keep that leaf safe."

Soon after, they reached the edge of the forest, and then a troll with three heads came rushing at them.

"Who dares to meddle with my forest?" the troll said.

"It's as much mine as yours," said the ox.

"We'll see about that," screamed the troll.

"Let's see, then," said the ox.

They charged at each other and fought. The ox charged and kicked with all its might, but the troll fought just as fiercely, and it lasted the entire day before the ox finally vanquished it, and by then it was so wounded and miserable that it could barely move. They had to rest for a day, and then the ox told the King's daughter to take the ointment horn hanging from the troll's belt and rub it on the ox; doing so, the ox recovered, and the next day they moved on again.

They traveled for many, many days, and eventually, they came to a silver forest; the trees, branches, leaves, flowers, everything was silver.

Before going in, the ox said to the King's daughter, "When we enter this forest, for God's sake, take care not to touch anything or break off even a single leaf, for it's over for both of us; there's a troll with six heads who owns it, and I hardly think I can handle it."

"No," said the King's daughter, "I shall be careful and not touch anything you don't want me to."

But when they got inside, it was so dense and close that they could barely make their way. She proceeded as cautiously as she could, bending away from the branches and pushing them away with her hands; but every now and then, a branch would hit her in the eyes, and try as she might, she ended up breaking off a leaf.

"Ouch, ouch, what have you done now?" said the ox; "it's a fight to the death, for this troll has six heads and is twice as strong as the other; but just keep that leaf safe."

Soon enough, the troll came. "Who dares to touch my forest?" it said.

"It's as much mine as yours," said the ox.

"We'll see about that," screamed the troll.

"Let's see, then," said the ox, and charged at the troll, gouging its eyes and driving its horns clear through it, spilling its guts everywhere, but the troll fought fiercely still, and it took three whole days before the ox got the better of it. But by then, it was so worn out and exhausted that it could hardly move, and it was so full of wounds that blood dripped from it. So the ox told the King's daughter to take the ointment horn that hung from the troll's belt and rub it on the ox. She did so, and the ox recovered, but they had to rest for a week before it could go further.

Eventually, they set off again; but the ox was still weak, and progress was slow at first. The King's daughter wanted to save it some effort and said she was young and light on her feet, she could easily walk; but she was not allowed to, she had to mount the ox's back again.

They traveled for a long time and through many lands, and the King's daughter had no idea where they were heading, but after a long while, they came to a gold forest; it was so magnificent that the gold dripped from it, and the trees, branches, flowers, leaves were all of pure gold.

This was much the same as in the copper and silver forests. The ox told the King's daughter she must not, under any circumstances, touch it, as a troll with nine heads owned it; it was much bigger and stronger than both the others together, and the ox didn't think it could handle it at all. No, she would be careful and avoid the forest completely, he was sure of it. But when they entered, it was even denser than the silver forest and grew tighter and tighter as they went along, to the point where she thought they couldn't proceed in any way. She was so afraid of breaking anything that she kept twisting and turning away from the branches and pushing them away with her hands; but every moment they struck her in the eyes, so she couldn't see where she grabbed, and before she knew it, she had a golden apple in her hand. She was so utterly frightened that she cried and wanted to throw it away; but the ox told her to keep it and save it well, comforting her as best as it could, though it doubted it would end well.

Sure enough, the nine-headed troll came; and it was so frightful that the King's daughter nearly fainted.

"Who dares to touch my forest?" it shouted.

"It's as much mine as yours," said the ox.

"We'll see about that," screamed the troll.

"Let's see, then," said the ox. And they charged at each other, fighting so ferociously that the King's daughter was on the verge of fainting. The ox gouged its eyes and impaled it clear through the entrails, spilling them out; but the troll fought just as fiercely, for when the ox managed to slay one head, the others blew life back into it, and it took an entire week before the ox was finally able to kill it. By then, it was so weakened and exhausted that it couldn't move, with wounds everywhere; it couldn't even manage to tell the King's daughter to take the ointment horn from the troll and rub it on the ox. But she did so anyway, and the ox recovered, but they had to rest and recover for three weeks before it was fit to continue.

They pressed on slowly because the ox said they should move a bit further, and they traveled over many big hills with thick forests. This went on for a while, and then they came up to the mountain.

"Do you see anything?" asked the ox.

"No, all I see is the sky and the wild mountain," said the King's daughter.

As they climbed higher, the mountain became flatter, so they could see further around.

"Do you see anything now?" asked the ox.

"Yes, I see a little castle far, far away," said the Princess.

"It's likely not so little at all," said the ox.

Much later, they reached a big hill, where there was a sheer cliff face.

"Do you see anything now?" asked the ox.

"Yes, now I see the castle up close, and it's much, much larger," said the King's daughter.

"That's where you have to go," said the ox; "right below the castle is a pigsty where you shall stay. When you get there, you'll find a wooden cloak; you must put it on and go to the castle, introduce yourself as Kari Woodpile, and ask for work. But now you shall take your little knife and cut my head off; then you must skin me and bundle the hide and lay it under the rock face there, and inside the hide, you must place the copper leaf, the silver leaf, and the golden apple. Over by the rock, there's a stick; when you need me, just knock on the rock face with it."

At first, she didn't want to; but when the ox said it was the only thanks he wanted for what he had done for her, she couldn't refuse. It was so deeply painful to her, but she toiled and cut with the knife on the great beast until she got off the head and the skin, then bundled it together under the rock face and placed the copper leaf, the silver leaf, and the golden apple inside it.

After she had done that, she went over to the pigsty; but as she walked, she wept and was heavy-hearted. There she put on the wooden cloak and then went to the King's manor; when she entered the kitchen, she asked for a job and said her name was Kari Woodpile. Yes, said the cook, she could certainly have that; she could wash the dishes, for the one who had done it before had recently left; "but when you tire of being here, you'll likely walk out as well." No, she certainly wouldn't do that. She was quite orderly with washing up. On Sunday, there were guests expected at the King's manor; so Kari asked if she could take wash water to the Prince, but the others laughed at her and said, "What do you want to do there? Do you think the Prince will have anything to do with you looking like that?" She didn't give up, she kept asking, and finally, they gave in. As she went up the stairs, the wooden cloak clattered, so the Prince came out and asked, "Who are you?" "They sent me with wash water for you," said Kari. "Do you think I want the wash water you carry?" said the Prince and splashed the water over her. She had to go with that; but then she asked if she could go to church; she got permission because the church was nearby. But first, she went to the rock and knocked with the stick that stood there, just as the ox had said. Out came a man and asked what she wanted. The King's daughter explained that now she had permission to go to church and listen to the priest, but she had no clothes to wear. So he brought her a gown, which was as bright as the copper forest, and horse and saddle too. When she arrived at the church, she looked so beautiful and splendid that everyone wondered who she was, and hardly anyone paid attention to what the priest was saying because they were staring too much at her; the Prince himself liked her so much he couldn't take his eyes off her for a moment.

As she walked out of the church, the Prince rushed after her and pulled the church door closed to catch her, and so he was left with one of her gloves in his hand. As she walked away and mounted the horse, the Prince came again and asked where she was from.

"I am from Washwaterland," said Kari; and when the Prince offered her the glove back, she said:

"Light ahead and dark behind, so the Prince can't see where I ride today!"

The Prince had never seen the like of the glove, and he asked wide and far about the country the proud lady who left her glove had mentioned, but no one could tell him where it was.

The next Sunday, someone was supposed to take a towel up to the Prince.

"Oh, may I go up with it?" asked Kari.

"What for?" said the others in the kitchen; "you saw what happened last time."

Kari didn't give up, and she kept asking until they let her take the towel, and then she ran up the stairs, making the wooden cloak rattle. The Prince came out, and when he saw it was Kari, he snatched the towel and threw it right in her face.

"Get out, you ugly troll!" he said, "do you think I'll take a towel you've touched with your dirty fingers?"

Later, the Prince went to church, and Kari also asked if she could go there. They asked what she wanted in church, she who had nothing to wear but the wooden cloak and who was so black and hideous. But Kari said she found the priest to be such a splendid man for preaching; she benefited so much from what he said, and so finally, she got permission. She went to the rock and knocked, and the man came out and gave her a gown even more splendid than the first; it was embroidered with silver all over, shining like the silver forest, and a magnificent horse with a silver-embroidered blanket and bridle she also received.

When the King's daughter arrived at the church, the congregation was still standing outside on the hill; they all wondered who she was, and the Prince was immediately on the move and rushed to hold the horse for her while she dismounted. But she jumped off and said it wasn't necessary, for the horse was so well-trained that it stood still when she commanded it and came when called. So they all hurried into the church and the priest to the pulpit; but hardly anyone listened to what he said, because they stared too much at her, and the Prince became even more captivated by her than the previous time. When the sermon ended, and she exited the church to mount the horse, the Prince came again and asked where she was from.

"I am from Towel Land," said the King's daughter, and at that moment she dropped her riding whip; when the Prince bent to pick it up, she said:

"Light ahead and dark behind, so the Prince can't see where I ride today!"

And she was gone again, and the Prince couldn't figure out where she had disappeared to; he searched wide and far and inquired about the land she claimed she was from, but no one could tell where it lay, so the Prince had to wait again.

On the third Sunday, someone was to take a comb up to the Prince; Kari asked for permission to take it up, but the others reminded her how it had gone last time and scolded her for wanting to appear before the Prince, so black and hideous as she was in her wooden cloak. But she persisted in asking until they allowed her to take the comb. As she rambled up the stairs again, the Prince came out, took the comb, and threw it at her, and told her to leave.

Later, the Prince went to the church, and Kari asked once more for permission; they asked again what she wanted there, looking hideous and black, without clothes fit to be seen among people; no one, Prince or otherwise, could lay eyes on her without being struck unfortunate, they said. But Kari insisted they had better things to look at, and she kept asking until they let her attend.

This time it went just like the previous two times; she went to the rock and knocked with the stick, and the man came out and gave her a dress more splendid than any of the previous ones; it was almost entirely gold and diamonds, and a fine horse with gold-embroidered blanket and bridle she also received.

When the King's daughter arrived at the church, the priest and congregation were still on the hill, waiting for her. The Prince rushed to hold the horse, but she leapt off and said, "No thank you, no need; my horse is so well-trained it stands when I tell it to." They all rushed into the church, the priest to the pulpit; but no one paid heed to what he preached, as they were too enamored by her, wondering who she might be, and the Prince fell even more in love with her than the previous occasions; he was entranced by nothing else and only watched her.

When the sermon ended, and the King's daughter was about to leave the church, the Prince had spread tar in the church porch to have an excuse to help her across; but she was not bothered by it, stepping right in the middle of the tar and hopping over; one of her golden shoes was left behind, and as soon as she mounted the horse, the Prince came dashing out of the church and asked where she was from.

"From Comb Land," said Kari. But as the Prince tried to hand her the golden shoe, she declared:

"Light ahead and dark behind, so the Prince can't see where I ride today!"

Once again, the Prince couldn't figure out where she had disappeared to, so he searched and asked around for a long while about Comb Land; but since no one could tell him where it was, he announced that the one who could wear the golden shoe would become his bride. Many came from far and wide, beautiful and ugly; but there was no one with feet so small that they could fit the shoe. Eventually, Kari Woodpile's wicked stepmother came with her daughter, and the shoe fit her; but she was so ugly and wretched looking that the Prince very unwillingly kept his promise. Nonetheless, preparations for the wedding were made, and she was decked out as a bride, but as they rode to the church, a little bird sat in a tree and sang, "A piece of heel and a piece of toe; Kari Woodpile's shoe is full of blood!"

And when they checked, the bird had spoken true, as blood seeped from the shoe. So all the maids and women at the castle had to try the shoe on themselves, but there was no one whom the shoe would fit.

"But where is Kari Woodpile?" asked the Prince when all the others had tried the shoe, for he understood the bird's song and remembered what it had said.

"Oh, her!" said the others; "it would never do to bring her here, she has feet like a horse."

"Perhaps," said the Prince, "but since all the others have tried, Kari should try as well."

"Kari!" he called out from the door, and Kari came clattering up the stairs, making a sound like a whole regiment of horsemen approaching.

"Now you get to try the gold shoe and become a princess too," said the other maids, laughing and mocking her.

Kari picked up the shoe, slipped her foot in as lightly as she wished, tossed off the wooden cloak, and stood there in a golden dress, shining brilliantly, and on the other foot, she wore the mate to the gold shoe. The Prince recognized her immediately and was so delighted, he ran over, took her by the waist, and kissed her; and when he heard she was a King's daughter, he was even happier, so they were married. Snip, Snap, Snout, this fairy tale's out!