The Three Sisters

Once upon a time, there was a poor man who lived in a cottage deep in the forest and lived by hunting. He had only one daughter who was both beautiful and kind. When her mother died early and the girl was already halfway grown up, she said she wanted to leave and learn to support herself. "Yes, my dear daughter," said the Father, "indeed you have learned nothing from me except how to pluck birds and cook, but you may well try to earn your bread anyway." So, the girl set out looking to serve others, and after she walked a while, she came to the King's mansion. There, she stayed, and the Queen took such a liking to her that the other maids became envious. They then started a rumor telling the Queen that the girl claimed to be able to spin a pound of flax within twenty-four hours because the Queen was fond of all sorts of handiwork. "Yes, if you've said it, then do it," said the Queen to her, "though you may have a bit more time." The poor girl dared not admit she had never spun before but asked only for a separate room. There she sat, crying, and feeling very uncomfortable. She didn't know what to do; she had never even seen a spinning wheel before. As she sat like this, an old woman came to her. "What's wrong with you, my child?" said she. "Oh," answered the girl, "I guess it's no use telling you, you can't help me anyway!" "Nobody can know that," said the old woman. "I may be able to find a solution." So the girl thought she might as well tell her. She then explained how her fellow servants claimed that she could spin a pound of flax in twenty-four hours; "And I, poor girl," she said, "I've never seen a spinning wheel, let alone spin that much in a single day." "Yes, that's the same thing," the old woman said; "if you will call me Aunt on your honor day, I'll spin for you, and you can go and sleep." The girl was more than happy to do this and went to sleep. When she woke up in the morning, all the flax was spun and on the table, looking so neat and fine that no one had ever seen such evenly spun and beautiful yarn. The Queen was very happy with the beautiful yarn she had received, and loved the girl even more than before. But that made the others even more envious of her, and they told the Queen that the girl had claimed to weave that yarn within twenty-four hours. The Queen repeated that if she had said it, she should do it; even if it took a bit longer than twenty-four hours. The girl didn't dare say no this time either but asked for a separate room where she could try. And there she sat again, crying, and feeling awful not knowing what to do. Then another old woman came in and asked, "What's wrong, my child?" The girl at first held back, but finally told her what she was so sad about. "Well," responded the woman, "that's the same thing, if you will call me Aunt on your honor day, I will weave for you, and you can go and sleep." The girl was more than happy to do this, and went to sleep. When she woke up, the roll was on the table, woven as close and as tight as it could be. She took the roll and brought it downstairs to the Queen, who was delighted with the beautiful weaving she had received and loved the girl even more than before. But then the others became even more envious and kept thinking about what they could do next. Eventually, they told the Queen that the girl had claimed to sew up the woven roll into shirts in twenty-four hours. Yes, the same thing occurred as before: The girl didn't dare deny that she could sew. She ended up in a room by herself again, crying and feeling upset. But then another old woman came to her again, who promised to sew for her if she would call her Aunt on her honor day. The girl gladly promised, and did as the woman said, and went to sleep. In the morning when she woke up, she found the roll sewn into shirts lying on the table. Such beautiful seamwork had never been seen before, and the shirts were fully finished and named. When the Queen saw the work, she was so pleased with the seams that she clapped her hands, "For such beautiful seams, I've never had or seen," she said, and then she cherished the girl as her own child. "If you want the Prince, you can have him," she said to the girl, "for you never need to hire anyone; you can sew and spin and weave all by yourself." When the girl and the Prince were about to get married, a very old, ugly woman with a long nose that was about three yards long came into the room. The bride got up and bowed, "Good day, Aunt!" "Is this the aunt of my bride?" asked the Prince. Yes, indeed she was. "Well, then, she can sit at the table," said the Prince, but both he and everyone else thought she was truly monstrous to sit next to. But before long, another old, terrible woman arrived; she had a back so big and wide, she barely fits through the door. In respect, the bride got up and greeted her: "Good day, Aunt!" The Prince asked if this was another aunt of his bride. Both women said yes, and the Prince said that if so, she should also sit at the table. But never had she sat before another old, horrible woman made her appearance, with eyes as big as plates, red and swollen, making a terrible sight. The bride got up again and greeted her: "Good day, Aunt!" And the Prince also asked her to sit at the table. But he wasn't pleased, and thought to himself: "God help me with the kind of aunts my bride has!" After he sat a little, he couldn't help but ask: "But how in the world can my bride, who is so lovely, have such dreadful and misshapen aunts?" "I can tell you that," said the first one. "I was as pretty as your bride when I was her age; but I ended up with such a long nose because I continuously sat cutting and nodding with spinning, and so my nose stretched to become as long as you see now." "And I," said the second one, "ever since I was young, I've sat pushing forward and back on the loom, and because of that my backside became as large and swollen as you see." Then the third said: "From a very young age, I've sat staring and sewing night and day; as a result, my eyes became so grotesque and red, and there's no longer any remedy for them." "Ah, so," said the Prince, "it was good I got to know this. If people can become so ugly and disgusting from it, then my bride shall never spin or weave or sew in her days anymore!"