Herreper

Once upon a time, there were a pair of poor people who had nothing but three sons. I don't know the names of the two eldest, but the youngest was named Per.

When their parents died, the children were to inherit their possessions, but there was nothing to inherit except a pot, a griddle, and a cat. The eldest, who was supposed to have the best, he took the pot: "When I lend the pot, I always get to scrape it," he said; the second took the griddle: "because when I lend the griddle, I always get a taste," he said; but the youngest had no choice; if he wanted anything, it had to be the cat. "If I lend the cat, I won't get anything for her," he said; "If the cat gets a mouthful of milk, she wants it for herself. But I'll take her with me anyway; it's a pity to let her stay here." So the brothers went out into the world to try their luck, each taking his own way. But after the youngest had walked for a while, the cat said: "You'll be lucky since you didn't want me to be left in the old room. Now I'll go into the woods and catch some rare animals, then you should go up to the royal estate, which you see over there, to the king, and say that you'll surely bring a small delivery to him. When he then asks who it's from, you should say it's from Sir Per." Indeed, Per didn't wait long before the cat came back with a reindeer from the woods. She had flown up to the head of the reindeer, and when she had settled between its horns, she said: "If you don't go straight to the royal estate, I'll claw out your eyes." The reindeer dared not do otherwise. When Per arrived at the royal estate, he went into the kitchen with the reindeer, and said: "I'm surely bringing a small delivery to the king, if he doesn't mind."

The king came out to the kitchen, and when he saw the grand reindeer he was very pleased. "But dear me! Who is it that sends me such a splendid delivery?" the king said.

"Oh, it's surely from Sir Per," said the boy.

"Sir Per?" said the king; "where should I say he lives?" - for he thought it was a shame that he didn't recognize such a good man.

But the boy didn't want to tell him; he dared not tell him for his master, he said. So the king gave Per many tips, and asked him to send his regards back home and give many thanks for the delivery.

The next day, the cat went into the woods again, and flew up to the head of a deer, placed herself between its eyes, and threatened it to go to the royal estate. Again, Per went into the kitchen with the animal, and said that he surely brought a small delivery to the king, if he didn't mind. The king was even more pleased with the deer than he had been with the reindeer, and asked again who could send him such a splendid delivery. "It's surely from Sir Per," said the boy. But when the king wanted to know where Sir Per lived, he got the same answer as the day before, and this time he gave Per even more tips. 

On the third day, the cat brought back a moose. When Per walked into the kitchen at the royal estate, he said he had a small delivery for the king, if he didn't mind. The king came directly out to the kitchen, and when he saw the grand moose, he was so pleased that he didn't know which foot to stand on, and that day he gave Per even more tips, it was probably a hundred dollars. He finally wanted to know where Sir Per lived and asked all kinds of questions; but the boy said he dared not tell him because his master had strictly forbidden it.

"So ask Sir Per to visit me," said the king.

"Yes, the boy would do that," he said.

But when he came out of the royal estate and met the cat, Per said: "Well, you've led me on a good chase. Now the king wants me to visit him, and all I have are the rags I'm wearing."

"Oh, don't worry about that," said the cat; "In three days, you'll get horses and a carriage and such fancy clothes that gold will drip from you; then you can visit the king. But everything you see at the king's, you must say you have it even grander and nicer at home; don't forget that."

No, Per was sure to remember that, he thought.

When the three days were over, the cat came with a carriage and horses and clothes and everything Per needed. It was all so grand that no one had ever seen anything like it before; so he set off, and the cat jumped along. The king received him very well; but whatever the king offered him and whatever he showed him, Per said it could be fine enough, but he had it even finer at home. The king didn't like this at all; but Per kept insisting, and finally the king was so angry that he couldn't control himself anymore. "Now I want to go home with you," said the king, "and see if it's true that you have it so much better and grander. But if you're lying, then may God help you, I won't say a word anymore!"

"Well, you've led me on a good chase," Per said to the cat, "now the king wants to come home with me; but it's probably not easy to find my place."

"Oh, don't bother about that," said the cat; "you just travel after where I jump first."

So they set off, first Per, who drove after where the cat was running, and then the king with all his people.

After they had driven a good way, they came to a large flock of beautiful sheep; they had wool so long that it almost reached the ground.

"If you say that the flock of sheep belongs to Sir Per when the king asks you, you'll get this silver spoon," the cat said to the shepherd; she had taken it with her from the royal estate.

Yes, he would gladly do that.

When the king came, he said to the shepherd: "I've never seen such a large and beautiful flock of sheep! Who owns it, my little boy?"

"It's probably Sir Per," said the boy.

In a little while, they came to a large, large flock of beautiful branded cattle; they were so fat that they glistened.

"If you say that the bølingen belongs to Sir Per when the king asks you, you'll get this silver ladle," the cat said to the shepherdess - the ladle she had also taken with her from the royal estate.

"Yes, I'd be happy to," said the shepherdess.

When the king came, he was quite amazed at the grand bølingen; for he thought he had never seen such a beautiful cow herd before, and then he asked the girl who was herding, who owned this branded livestock?

"Oh, it's Sir Per," said the girl.

They traveled a little further, and then they came to a large, large flock of horses; these were the most beautiful horses one could see, large and fat, and six of each kind, both red and black and blue.

"If you say that the herd of horses belong to Sir Per when the king asks you, you'll get this silver ladle," the cat said to the shepherd - the ladle she had also brought from the royal estate.

Yes, he would surely do that, said the boy.

When the king came, he was quite in awe of the grand herd of horses; for such horses he had never seen the like, he said. He then asked the shepherd boy, to whom did the red and black and blue horses belong.

"It's probably Sir Per," said the boy.

After they had traveled a considerable distance, they came to a castle; first there was a gate made of