The Man's Daughter and the Old Woman's Daughter.

Once upon a time, there were two people who had married; each had a daughter. The old woman's daughter was lazy and idle and never wanted to do anything, while the man's daughter was diligent and willing. Yet, she could never please the mother, and both the old woman and her daughter wanted to be rid of her. One day, both girls were to sit by the well and spin; the old woman's daughter was spinning flax, but the man's daughter only got bristles. "You're always so clever and skillful," said the old woman's daughter, "but even so, I’m not afraid to compete with you in spinning." So they agreed that whoever's spinning dropped first would have to go into the well. Just as it happened, it dropped for the man's daughter, and she had to go into the well. But when she reached the bottom, she wasn't hurt, and all around her was a beautiful green meadow.

She walked a bit on the meadow and came to a hedge; she had to cross it. "Oh, don't step hard on me," said the hedge, "and I'll help you another time." She stepped as lightly as a feather, barely touching it.

She continued walking and met a brindled cow with a milk pail on her horns. It was a big, beautiful cow, and her udder was so full and round. "Oh, please milk me," said the cow, "for I’m so full of milk; drink as much as you want, and pour the rest on my hooves, and I'll help you again."

The man's daughter did as the cow asked; just by taking hold of the teats, the milk sprayed into the pail. She drank her fill, poured the rest on the cow's hooves, and hung the pail back on the horns.

After walking a while on the meadow, she met a big ram, whose wool was so thick and long it trailed behind him, and on one horn hung a large pair of scissors. "Oh, please shear me," said the ram, "for I’m dragging all this wool around, and it’s so hot I’m about to suffocate. Take as much as you want, and wrap the rest around my neck, and I'll help you again."

She willingly agreed, and the ram laid his head in her lap and lay so still while she sheared him carefully without even nicking his skin. She took all the wool she wanted and wrapped the rest around the ram's neck.

A little further on, she came to an apple tree, so full of apples that all the branches bent to the ground, and by the trunk stood a small stick. "Oh, please pick the apples off me," said the tree, "so my branches can straighten up, for it’s burdensome to be so bent; but do it gently, so you don't ruin me; eat as much as you want, and lay the rest at my roots, and I'll help you again."

She picked what she could reach and gently knocked down the rest with the stick; she ate her fill and laid the rest neatly at the roots.

She walked a long, long way and eventually came to a large farm, where an old troll woman lived with her daughter. She went in and asked for work. "Oh, it’s no use," said the troll woman; "we’ve had many, but none of them have amounted to anything." But the girl begged so sweetly that they finally took her in. The troll woman gave her a sieve and told her to fetch water with it. She thought it was unreasonable to fetch water in a sieve, but went nonetheless, and as she approached the well, the little birds sang:

"Paste it with clay, stick in straw! Paste it with clay, stick in straw!"

She did just that, and was able to carry water in the sieve quite well; but when she returned with the water, and the troll woman saw the sieve, she said, "You didn’t figure this trick out yourself!"

Then the troll woman said she should go to the barn and muck it and milk the cows. But when she got there, the fork was so big and heavy that she couldn’t handle it; she couldn’t lift it at all. She didn't know what to do, but the birds sang that she should take the rake and cast a little out, and everything else would fly out after it. She did that, and no sooner was it done than the barn was as clean as if it had both been mucked out and swept. Now she was supposed to milk the cows, but they were so restless, kicking and struggling, that she wasn’t able to milk them. But then the birds outside sang:

"Tiny stream, tiny sip, to feed all the little birds a drip!"

She did as the birds sang, squirting a tiny stream of milk for the birds; then all the cows stood still and let her milk without any kicking or stamping; they didn’t even lift a foot.

When the troll woman saw her come in with the milk, she said, "You didn’t figure this trick out yourself! But now you can take the black wool and wash it white." The girl had no idea how to do this, as she had never seen anyone wash black wool white before, but she said nothing; she took the wool to the well. The birds sang that she should put the wool in the big tub to wash it, and it would turn white.

"No, no!" said the troll woman when the girl came in with the wool, "it’s no use keeping you, you can do everything; you'd wear my patience out eventually, it's best you get your walking orders."

Then the troll woman set out three caskets, a red one, a green one, and a blue one, and said she could choose whichever she wanted as her reward. She didn't know which to take, but the birds sang:

"Don't take the green, don't take the red; take the blue, with three crosses overhead!" So she chose the blue one as the birds sang. "Curse upon you," said the troll woman, "you’ll pay for this eventually."

As the man's daughter was about to leave, the troll woman hurled a blazing iron bar after her; but she jumped behind the door just in time and hid so it wouldn’t hit her, for the birds had told her what to do. She hurried away as fast as she could, but when she reached the apple tree, she heard a rumbling on the road; it was the troll woman and her daughter coming after her. The girl was so frightened that she didn’t know what to do.

"Come here to me," said the apple tree, "and I'll help you; hide under my branches and they won’t see you; otherwise they’ll take the casket from you and tear you to pieces."

Yes, she did just that; and just as she hid, the troll woman and her daughter arrived.

"Have you seen a girl go by here?" asked the troll woman.

"Oh yes," said the apple tree, "one ran by here a while ago, but she's so far ahead now you’ll never catch up with her."

So, the troll woman turned back and went home.

The girl continued on; but when she got to the ram, she heard the rumbling again, so loud that she didn't know what to do, trembling with fear; for surely, it meant the troll woman had reconsidered.

"Come here to me, and I'll help you," said the ram; "hide under my wool and they won't see you; otherwise, they'll take the casket from you and tear you to pieces."

Just as before, the troll woman came rushing.

"Have you seen a girl go by here?" she asked the ram.

"Oh yes," said the ram, "I saw one a while ago, but she ran so fast you won't catch up with her."

So, the troll woman turned back and went home.

When the girl had reached the cow, she heard the rumbling again on the road.

"Come here to me," said the cow, "and I'll help you; hide under my udder, otherwise the troll woman will take the casket from you and tear you to pieces."

Before long, the troll woman came. "Have you seen a girl go by here?" she asked the cow.

"Yes, I saw one a while ago, but she's far away now, for she ran so fast; you won't catch her," said the cow. The troll woman then turned around and went home.

Having traveled a long, long way, and nearing the hedge, the girl again heard the rumbling on the road, and was both scared and distressed; for surely, it meant the troll woman had turned around again.

"Come here to me, and I'll help you," said the hedge; "crawl under my twigs, and they won't see you; otherwise, they'll take the casket from you and tear you to pieces." Yes, she quickly crawled under the twigs in the hedge.

"Have you seen a girl go by here?" asked the troll woman to the hedge.

"No, I haven’t seen any girl," replied the hedge, and it became so angry that it spread and expanded, making it impossible to get across; so there was no other choice for the troll woman than to turn around and go home once more.

When the man's daughter finally got home safely, both the old woman and her daughter became more envious than ever before; for now, she was even more beautiful, and she was grand beyond words. However, she wasn’t allowed to stay inside; they chased her out to the pigsty where she had to live. Here, she cleaned up nicely and opened the casket to see what her reward was; and as soon as she opened it, there was so much gold and silver and so many beautiful things that the walls and the ceiling were all covered, making the pigsty much finer than the grandest royal palace. When the stepmother and her daughter saw this, they were beside themselves and began asking her how the work had been. "Oh," she said, "you can imagine, since I got such a reward; the people and the lady I worked for were unrivaled."

So, the old woman's daughter insisted on going to work as well, hoping to get herself a similar casket of gold. They sat down to spin again; but this time, the old woman's daughter had to spin bristles and the man's daughter flax, and whoever's spinning dropped first would go into the well. It wasn’t long before the old woman's daughter’s spinning dropped, as you might guess, and they threw her into the well.

And so it went; she fell to the bottom, unhurt, and came upon the same beautiful green meadow. After walking a bit, she came to the hedge. "Don't step hard on me, and I'll help you," said the hedge.

"Oh, what do I care about a heap of twigs," she said, and heavy-footed, she trampled the hedge so it creaked under her feet.

Soon, she came to the cow, full-to-bursting with milk.

"Please, milk me and I'll help you; drink all you want, but pour the rest on my hooves."

Yes, she did that: she milked the cow, drank all she could, leaving nothing to pour on the hooves; then she threw the pail over a hill and left.

After walking a bit, she came to the ram, dragging his wool behind him.

"Oh, please shear me, and I'll help you," said the ram; "take as much wool as you want, but wrap the rest around my neck."

She sheared the ram, but carelessly cut large holes in his skin and took all the wool with her.

A little while later, she came to the apple tree, standing crookedly with its heavy load of apples.

"Please pick the apples from me so my branches can straighten, for it's burdensome being so bent," said the apple tree; "but be gentle, so you don't ruin me; eat as much as you want, but lay the rest neatly at my roots, and I'll help you."

She plucked the nearest ones and knocked down others with the stick, not caring for the tree, ripping and tearing down large branches, and ate until she couldn't anymore, throwing the rest under the tree.

After walking a little further, she arrived at the farm where the troll woman lived; there, she asked for work. The troll woman said she didn’t want any maids because they were either useless or too clever, and deceived her for all she was worth. Still, the old woman's daughter insisted she wanted the job, and finally, the troll woman agreed to hire her.

The first thing she had to do was fetch water with the sieve. She went to the well and poured water into the sieve, but as fast as she poured it in, it ran out again. The birds sang:

"Paste it with clay, stick in straw! Paste it with clay, stick in straw!" 

But she paid no attention to the bird's song; she threw clay at the birds, scaring them away, and came back with an empty sieve, receiving a scolding from the troll woman.

Next, she was to muck the barn and milk the cows, but she thought that task was beneath her. Nonetheless, she went into the barn, but couldn't handle the fork, it was so large. The birds sang the same advice as they did for the man's daughter, to take the rake and cast a little out, and all the rest would follow, but she threw the rake at the birds. When it came to milking, the cows were so restless and kicked and stomped, and each time she got a little milk in the pail, they knocked it over. The birds sang:

"Tiny stream, tiny sip, to feed all the little birds a drip!"

But she hit and scolded the cows, throwing and tossing whatever she could at the birds, behaving so outrageously. And she neither mucked nor milked the cows. When she returned, she received both blows and scoldings from the troll woman. Then, she was supposed to wash the black wool white, which didn’t turn out any better.

Seeing all this as too much trouble, the troll woman set out three caskets—one red, one green, and one blue—and said she had no use for her since she was good for nothing, but still, she could choose whichever casket she wanted as a reward. The birds sang:

"Don't take the green, don't take the red; take the blue, with three crosses overhead!"

She paid no attention to what the birds sang and took the red one, which glowed the brightest. She then set off on her way home and was able to travel calmly; no one pursued her. When she got home, there was great excitement from the mother, and they immediately placed the casket in the parlor, believing it contained nothing but gold and silver and thinking the walls and ceiling would be adorned. But when they opened it, only snakes and toads poured out, and when the old woman's daughter opened her mouth, it was the same: snakes, toads, and all sorts of vermin imaginable poured out, making it impossible to stay in the house with her. That was the reward she received for having served the troll woman.