17. The Bear and The Fox.

Why The Bear is stubby-tailed.

The Bear once met The Fox, who was sneaking around with a bundle of fish he had stolen.

"Where did you get this from?" asked The Bear.

"I have been out fishing, Mr. Bear!" answered The Fox.

Then The Bear also wanted to learn how to fish, and asked The Fox to tell him how he should go about it.

"It is a simple art for you," answered The Fox, "and it is soon learned; you just need to go out on the ice, chop a hole and stick your tail in; and then you must hold it there for quite a while. You mustn’t worry if it stings a little: that’s when the fish bites; the longer you can hold it there, the more fish you will get. And at just the right moment, you must yank it up!"

Yes, The Bear did as The Fox had said, and held his tail in the hole for a long, long time, until it was frozen solidly in; then he yanked it - abruptly off, and now he goes around stubby-tailed to this very day.

The Fox cheats The Bear out of his Christmas food.

The Bear and The Fox once bought together a tub of butter; they were going to have it for Christmas, and therefore hid it under a thick spruce bush. Then they walked away and lay down in a sunny slope to sleep. Once they had been lying there awhile, The Fox got up and cried: "Yes!" - set off, and straight to the tub of butter, of which he ate a good third. But when he came back, and The Bear asked where he had been, since he was so greasy around the mouth, he said: "Don’t you think I was invited to a christening?"

"Oh yeah! What was the name of the child?" asked The Bear.

"Begun-on," said The Fox.

With that, they went back to sleep. After a short while, The Fox again jumped up and cried: "Yes!" and off he dashed to the tub of butter. That time, he also ate a good chunk. When he returned, and The Bear again asked where he had been, he replied: "Ah, don’t you think I was invited to yet another christening?"

"What was the name of the child now then?" said The Bear.

"Half-eaten," answered The Fox.

The Bear thought that was a strange name, but he didn't ponder it long before he yawned and went back to sleep; just a short while later, the same thing happened as the previous times: The Fox jumped up again, cried "Yes!" and off to the tub of butter, which this time he ate the last chunk of. When he returned, he had again been at a christening; and when The Bear wanted to know what the child was named, he answered: "Licked-clean!"

With that, they lay down to sleep again and slept for a good while. Then they went to check on the butter; but then it was all eaten up. And then The Bear blamed The Fox and The Fox blamed The Bear; each claimed the other had been at the tub of butter while he himself was sleeping.

"Yes, yes," said Mikkel (The Fox), "we will soon find out who of us has stolen the butter. Now we must lie over there on the sunny slope: whoever is greasiest at the end when we wake up, he has stolen it."

Yes, The Bear was keen to take that test, and since he knew for himself that he hadn't even tasted the butter, he very confidently laid down to sleep in the sun. Then Mikkel sneakily went back to the tub for a sliver of butter that was left in a crack, and back to The Bear and smeared him on the bottom with it; then he lay down to sleep, as if nothing had happened. When they both woke up, the sun had melted the butter, so The Bear was the one who had eaten the butter after all.