About the Boy who went to the North Wind and demanded his Flour back.

Once upon a time there was an old woman who had a son. Since she was weak and frail, her son was tasked to enter the storehouse for her to fetch some porridge flour for their midday meal. However, as he stepped out onto the storehouse staircase, the North Wind came gusting, took the flour from him and flew off into the sky with it. The boy went back into the storehouse for more, but as he stepped out onto the steps again, the North Wind came gusting back and took the flour from him, and so it happened a third time. This angered the boy, thinking it was unfair for the North Wind to do such a thing. So, he decided to confront the North Wind and demand his flour back.

He set off on his journey; but the way was long, and he walked and walked; until at last he came to the North Wind. "Good Day," said the Boy, "and thank you for last time." "Good Day," replied the North Wind - he was rough of speech - "and thanks yourself for last time. What do you want?" He said. "Ah," said the boy, "I would like you to be kind enough to return the flour you took from me on the storehouse steps; we have little, and when you act like this and take the little we have, we will surely starve." "I have no flour," said the North Wind; "but since you are in such need, I will give you a cloth, which will fetch you everything you could wish for, if you just say: Cloth, spread yourself out and serve up all kinds of exquisite dishes!"

The boy was rather pleased with this. But since the way was so long that he could not make it home in one day, he went to an inn on the road. When it was time for the patrons to have their supper, he laid the cloth on a table in the corner and said: "Cloth, spread yourself out and serve up all kinds of exquisite dishes!" Never before had he said these words when the cloth didn’t do it, and everyone thought it was a glorious thing; but nobody loved it more than the innkeeper's wife. There was not much to bother about with frying and boiling, with setting and clearing the table, she thought. So, late in the night, when everyone was asleep, she took the boy's cloth and replaced it with another that looked exactly like the one he got from the North Wind, but which couldn't even serve up oat cakes.

When the boy woke up, he took his cloth and went off. That day he made it home to his mother. "Well," he said, "I have been to the North Wind; he was quite a man, for he gave me this cloth, and when I say to it: 'Cloth, spread yourself out and serve up all kinds of exquisite dishes!' I get all the food I can wish for." "Yes, I’m sure," said his mother, "but I won't believe it until I see it."

The boy quickly set up a table, placed the cloth on it and said: "Cloth, spread yourself out and serve up all kinds of exquisite dishes!" But the cloth did not even serve up a bite of flatbread.

"There seems to be no other way but to go back to the North Wind again," said the boy, and so he set off. Late in the afternoon he reached the place where the North Wind lived. "Good Evening," said the boy. "Good Evening," said the North Wind. "I want what's due for the flour you took from me," said the boy; "because the cloth I got, didn't do much." "I have no flour," said the North Wind, "but there you have a goat, which produces gold coins, just say: 'My Goat, make money!'"

The boy liked this; but since it was such a long way home that he could not make it in one day, he stayed once again at the inn. Before he ordered anything, he tried the goat, for he wanted to see if what the North Wind had said was true, and it certainly was; but when the innkeeper saw this, he thought it was a splendid goat, and when the boy had fallen asleep, he took another goat, which surely did not produce gold coins, and put it in its place.

The next morning the boy set off, and when he came home to his mother, he said: "The North Wind is a clever man after all; now he gave me a goat, which can make gold coins, just by me saying: 'My Goat, make money!'" "I’m sure," said his mother, "it's nothing but talk, and I won't believe it until I see it."

"My Goat, make money!" the boy said; but it was not money the goat produced.

So, he returned to the North Wind again, and told him that the goat didn't do anything, and that he wanted what was due for the flour. "Well, now I have nothing else to give you," said the North Wind, "except the old stick standing in the corner there; but it is such that when you say: 'My Stick, strike!' it strikes, until you say: 'My Stick, be still!'"

Since the way was long, the boy again stayed the night at the inn. But as he realized what might have happened to the cloth and the goat, he immediately pretended to doze on the bench. The innkeeper, who also figured the stick must be extraordinary, looked for one that looked like it and was about to switch it, thinking the boy was fast asleep; but just as the innkeeper was about to take the stick, the boy shouted: "My Stick, strike!" And the Stick struck the innkeeper, so he hopped about, over both tables and benches, screaming: "Oh, dear God! Oh, dear God! Hold the Stick still, or it will beat me to death; you can have both the cloth and the goat back." When the boy thought that the innkeeper had had enough, he said: "My stick, be still," took the cloth and stick, tied a string around the goat's horns, and went home with everything. That was fair recompense for the flour!