Askeladden Who Competed with the Troll.

Once upon a time, there was a farmer who had three sons. He was poor, old, and weak, and the sons did not want to work. The farm had a large, beautiful forest, which the father wanted the boys to cut trees in to pay off some debts. Finally, he persuaded them, and the eldest son was to go out and chop wood first. When he arrived in the forest and began to chop an old, bearded spruce, a big, burly troll appeared. "If you chop wood in my forest, I will kill you!" said the troll. Hearing this, the boy dropped his axe and ran back home as fast as he could. He returned home breathless and reported what had happened to him, but his father said that he was a coward; the trolls had never scared him from chopping wood when he was young.

The second day, it was the turn of the next son, and the same thing happened. When he was chopping the spruce, the troll appeared and said: "If you chop wood in my forest, I will kill you!" The boy hardly dared to look at him, dropped his axe, and ran home like his brother, if not faster. When he returned home, the father became angry, saying the trolls had never scared him when he was young.

On the third day, it was Askeladden's turn. "Sure, you will manage," said the two older brothers, "you who have never been outside the door!" Askeladden didn't respond, but asked only for a hefty picnic with him. The mother had no lard, so she had to make do. He got a bag full of food and set off. After chopping for a short while, the troll also came to him and said: "If you chop wood in my forest, I will kill you!" But the boy was not slow; he rushed into the forest with his cheese, squeezing it so the whey splashed. "If you don't keep quiet," he yelled at the troll, "I will squeeze you like I squeeze the water out of this white stone!" "No, dear, spare me," said the troll, "I will help you to chop wood." On that condition, the boy spared him, and the troll turned out to be an excellent wood chopper, and they chopped many logs that day.

When it was getting late, the troll said, "Now you can come home with me; it's closer to my house than it is to yours." The boy agreed, and when they arrived at the troll's house, the boy was to warm up the fireplace while the troll went for water to make porridge. But there were two iron pots, so big and heavy that he couldn't even lift them. So the boy said, "It isn't worth taking these finger bowls; I'll go for the whole well." "No, dear me," said the troll, "I can't lose my well - you warm up the fire, and I will go for water." When he returned with the water, they cooked a big pot of porridge. "It's the same," said the boy, "how about we have an eating competition." "Oh yes!" answered the troll, thinking he would certainly win.

They sat down to the table, and unnoticed, the boy tied up his leather bag in front of him, and scooped more into the bag than he ate himself. Once the bag was full, he took his knife and made a small cut in the bag. The troll was watching him but said nothing. After they had been eating for a while, the troll put his spoon aside; "No, I can't eat more," he said. "You have to eat!" the boy answered, "I am hardly half full yet. If you do what I did, and cut a hole in your stomach, you can eat as much as you want." "But won't that hurt terribly?" asked the troll. "Oh, nothing worth mentioning," replied the boy. So, the troll did as the boy said, and as we can expect, he lost his life. But the boy took all the silver and gold found in the cave and went home with it. With that, he was able to pay off some of the farm's debts.