About Askeladden who stole the Troll's Silver Ducks, Bedspread, and Golden Harp. Once upon a time, there was a poor man who had three sons. When he died, the two oldest sons were to go out into the world to try their luck; but they didn't want to take the youngest with them. "You," they said, "are good for nothing more than sitting and poking in the ashes." "Then I will go alone," said Askeladden. The two left and came to the King's court; there they were hired, one by the stable master, and the other by the gardener. Askeladden also set off, taking with him a large kneading trough, which was the only thing they had from their parents, but which the other two didn't care about; it was heavy to carry, but he didn't want to leave it behind. After he had walked for a while, he too came to the King's court and asked for service. They told him that they didn't need him; but he pleaded so beautifully that in the end they allowed him to work in the kitchen, carrying firewood and water to the kitchen maid. He was diligent and clever, and it wasn't long before everyone liked him a lot; but the other two were lazy, and because of this they received little wages and a lot of scolding, and so they became jealous of Askeladden when they saw that he was faring better. Opposite the King's court, on the other side of a lake, lived a troll, and it had seven silver ducks that swam out on the lake so they could be seen from the King's court. The King had often wished for these, and so the two brothers told the stable master: "If our brother wished, he has claimed he could procure the King the seven silver ducks." It didn't take long before the stable master told this to the King. The King then summoned Askeladden and said: "Your brothers tell me that you can procure me the silver ducks, and now you must do so." "That was neither my thought nor words," said the boy. But the King insisted: "You said it, and now you must," he said. "Well, well," said the boy, "if there is no other way, give me a quarter of rye and a quarter of wheat, and I suppose I can try." He got this and put it into the kneading trough he had brought from home, and rowed over with it. When he got to the other side, he started to walk along the beach, scattering and scattering, and finally he lured the ducks into the trough, and rowed back as quickly as he could. When he was in the middle of the lake, the troll came out and saw him. "Have you taken off with my seven silver ducks?" it shouted. "Yes-a!" said the boy. "Will you come back often?" asked the troll. "That may well happen," said the boy. When he came back to the King with the seven silver ducks, he was even more liked in the King’s court, and even the King himself said that it was well done; but his brothers became even angrier and more envious of him; and so they told the stable master that now he had claimed he could procure the King the troll's bedspread, with a silver square and a golden square and a silver square and a golden square, if he just wanted to; and the stable master didn’t hesitate to tell this to the King either. The King then said to the boy that his brothers had told that he had claimed he could procure the troll's bedspread with silver and gold squares, and now he should do so, or else he would lose his life. Askeladden replied that he had neither thought nor said this; but it didn’t help, and he asked for three days to think it over. When the days were over, he rowed over again in the kneading trough, walking up and down, and waiting. Finally, he saw that they in the mountain were hanging out the bedspread to air it, and when they had gone well back into the mountain, Askeladden grabbed it, and rowed back as quickly as he could. When he was in the middle of the lake, the troll came out and saw him. "Is it you who has taken my seven silver ducks?" shouted the troll. "Yes-a!" said the boy. "And have you now taken my bedspread, with one silver square and one gold square and one silver square and one gold square?" "Yes-a!" said the boy. "Will you return often?" "That might just happen," said the boy. When he now returned with the gold and silver bedspread, everyone liked him even more than before, and he became a servant to the King himself. This made the other two even angrier, and to take their revenge they told the stable master: "Now our brother has claimed he could procure the King the golden harp the troll has, that is such, that everyone becomes happy when they hear it, no matter how sad they are." Yes, the stable master told this immediately to the King, and he said to the boy: "If you have said so, you shall do it. If you can, you shall marry the Princess and have half of the kingdom; but if you cannot, you shall lose your life." "I neither thought of it, nor said it," Askeladden answered; "but there is probably no other way, I shall try. But I will need six days to think it over." Yes, he should have that; but when they were over, he had to go on his way. He then took a spike, a birch twig, and a piece of candle in his pocket and rowed over, wandering back and forth outside smacking his lips. After a while, the troll came out and saw him. "Is it you who has taken my seven silver ducks?" the troll shouted. "Yes-a!" answered the boy. "Is it you who has taken my bedspread with silver and gold squares too then?" asked the troll. "Yes-a!" said the boy. Then the troll grabbed him and took him inside the mountain. "Now, my daughter," he said, "now I have caught the one who has taken my silver ducks and my bedspread with silver and gold squares; put him in the dung chair, then we will slaughter him and invite our friends." She was immediately willing and put him in the dung chair, where he stayed for eight days, receiving the best he could wish for in terms of food and drink, and as much as he wanted. When the eight days were over, the troll told the daughter to go down and cut him in the little finger, so they could see if he was fat. She went down to the dung chair. "Give me your little finger!" she said; but Askeladden put out the spike, which she cut into. "Oh no! He is still hard as iron," said the troll's daughter when she came back to her father; "we can not take him yet." After eight more days, it went the same way, only this time Askeladden put forward the birch twig. "He is a little better," she said, coming back to the troll, "but he is still hard to chew, like wood." But after eight more days, the troll again said that the daughter should go down and see if he was fat now. "Give me your little finger!" said the troll's daughter when she came down to the dung chair; this time Askeladden put forward the piece of candle. "Now he will do," she said. "Yes, so!" said the troll; "then I will leave and invite to the party; meanwhile, you should slaughter him, and roast half of him and boil half of him." When the troll had left, the daughter started to sharpen a large long knife. "Are you going to slaughter me with that?" the boy asked. "Yes indeed!" said the troll's daughter. "But it's not sharp," said the boy; "I’ll sharpen it, so you can take my life more easily." She then let him have the knife, and he started to sharpen it. "Let me now try it on your hair braid," said the boy; "I think it's good now." He got permission, but as soon as he gripped her hair braid, he tilted her head backwards and cut off her head, then he roasted and boiled half each and set it on the table. Then he put on her clothes and sat in the corner. When the troll came home with the guests, he asked his daughter – thinking it was her – to come and eat too. "No," answered the boy, "I don’t want food; I am so sad and tired of myself." "Oh, you know a cure for that," said the troll, "take the golden harp and play!" "Yes, where is it now then?" Askeladden asked again. "You know that – you were the