Once upon a time there was a man and his wife, and they had a son called Halvor. From the time he was a little boy, Halvor would never do a thing. He just sat by the fire and raked about in the ashes. His parents sent him off to learn one trade after another, but he never stayed anywhere. After a few days he would run away from his master, trot home and sit down in the ashes again.

Then one day a skipper came by and asked Halvor if he would like to go to sea and see foreign lands. Yes, Halvor would like that, and for once in his life he was quick about getting ready.

How long they sailed I couldn’t tell you. But at long last a great storm blew up, and when it was over and the sea lay calm again, nobody on board knew where they were. They had been blown to a strange coast that none of them had ever seen.

The air was so still that not a feather stirred, and there they lay. Halvor asked the skipper if he might go ashore and look around. He would sooner walk, he said, than lie there sleeping.

“Do you think you’re fit to be seen?” said the skipper. “You’ve nothing but the rags you stand up in.”

Halvor kept on asking, and in the end he got his way. Only he was to come back as soon as the wind got up.

It was a lovely country. Wherever he went there were broad plains with fields and meadows, but not a person anywhere. Then the wind began to blow. But Halvor didn’t think he had seen nearly enough yet. He wanted to go a little further and see if he could find some people.

After a while he came to a great road, so smooth you could have rolled an egg along it. He followed it, and as evening drew on he saw a huge castle far away, with light streaming from every window. He had walked all day with next to nothing to eat, and he was ravenous. But the nearer he came to the castle, the more frightened he grew.

Inside, the fires were roaring. Halvor went into the kitchen, and it was finer than any kitchen he had ever seen. The pots and pans were all gold and silver, but the kitchen was empty. He waited a while, and when nobody came, he went and opened a door. In there sat a princess at her spinning wheel.

“Oh, no, no!” she cried. “Do Christian folk dare come here? You’d better go away again, or the troll will swallow you. There’s a troll lives here with three heads.”

“I don’t care if he’s got four,” said Halvor. “I’d like to have a look at the fellow. And I’m not going, because I’ve done nothing wrong. But you’ll have to give me something to eat. I’m starving.”

When he had eaten his fill, the princess told him to see if he could swing the sword that hung on the wall. No, he couldn’t swing it. He couldn’t even lift it.

“Then you must take a swig from the flask that hangs beside it,” said the princess. “That’s what the troll does when he goes out to use the sword.”

Halvor took a swig, and now he could swing the sword like a stick of kindling. Let the troll come whenever he liked, he thought.

He didn’t have long to wait. The troll came rushing home, and Halvor stood behind the door.

“Huttetu! I smell the blood of a Christian man!” said the troll, and poked his heads in through the doorway.

“So you do,” said Halvor, and cut off all three.

The princess was so glad to be saved that she danced and sang. Then she remembered her sisters.

“If only my sisters were saved too!” she said.

“Where are they?” asked Halvor.

One of them, she told him, had been carried off by a troll to a castle sixty miles away, and the other to a castle ninety miles beyond that.

“But first,” she said, “you must help me get this carcass out of here.”

Halvor was so strong by now that he had the whole mess swept out and the place spick and span in no time.

That night he ate well and slept soundly, and at first light he was off. There was no rest in him now. He walked and he ran the whole day long, and when he caught sight of the next castle, he grew a little frightened again, for it was far grander than the first. But here, too, there wasn’t a living soul. Halvor went into the kitchen, and this time he didn’t stop there, but walked straight on in.

“Oh, do Christian folk dare come here?” cried the princess. “I don’t know how long it is since I came, but in all that time I haven’t seen a Christian soul. You’d better get away while you can. There’s a troll lives here with six heads.”

“I’m not going,” said Halvor. “Not if he had six more.”

“He’ll swallow you alive,” said the princess.

It was no good. Halvor wouldn’t budge. He wasn’t afraid of the troll, but he wanted food and drink, for he was hungry after his journey. He got all he wanted, and then the princess tried to send him off again.

“No,” said Halvor. “I’m not going. I’ve done nothing wrong, and I’ve nothing to be afraid of.”

“That won’t matter to him,” said the princess. “He’ll take you, right or wrong. But since you won’t go, see if you can swing the sword the troll uses in battle.”

He couldn’t, not until he had taken a swig from the flask beside it. Then he could.

Just then the troll came home. He was so huge and fat that he had to turn sideways to get through the door, and as soon as his first head was inside, he bellowed, “Huttetu! I smell the blood of a Christian man!”

He got no further. Halvor cut off the first head, and then all the others.

The princess was so happy she didn’t know which foot to stand on. But then she thought of her little sister and wished that she were free as well. Halvor thought that could surely be managed and wanted to set off at once. First, though, he had to help her get rid of the troll’s body, so it was the next morning before he was on his way.

It was a long way to the last castle, and he walked and ran to get there in time. Toward evening he saw it, and it was grander than both the others. By now he was hardly frightened at all. He went through the kitchen and straight on in, and there sat a princess so lovely there was no end to it.

She said just what the others had said. No Christian folk had been there since she came, and he had better go, or the troll would swallow him alive. This one had nine heads.

“Let him have nine heads, and nine more on top of those, and nine more after that,” said Halvor. “I’m not going.” And he went and stood by the stove.

The princess begged him ever so sweetly to leave before the troll could eat him. Halvor only said, “Let him come when he likes.”

So she fetched the troll’s sword and told him to take a swig from the flask.

“If you won’t go,” she said, “you had better win.”

Then the troll came, with a rush and a roar. He was bigger and fatter than both the others, and he too had to squeeze through the door sideways.

“Huttetu! I smell the blood of a Christian man!”

Halvor cut off the first head, and then the next, and the next. But the last was the toughest of them all. Getting that one off was the hardest work Halvor had ever done, and he had thought himself strong enough for anything.

Now all three princesses came together at that castle, and they were happier than they had ever been in their lives. They were all fond of Halvor, and he of them, and he could have whichever one he liked best. But the youngest was the fondest of him of all.

Yet Halvor went about so strange and glum and quiet that the youngest princess asked him what he was pining for. Didn’t he like being there with them?

Oh yes, he liked it well enough. They had plenty to live on, and he was very comfortable. But he longed for home. His parents were still alive, and he wanted so much to see them again.

The princesses thought that could be arranged. “You’ll get there and back safe and sound,” they said, “as long as you do as we tell you.”

He said he would do nothing but what they told him. So they dressed him up until he was as fine as any king’s son. Then the three princesses gathered round him in the great hall, and the youngest took his hand and slid a ring onto his finger.

“With this you can wish yourself there and back again,” she said, and she looked him straight in the eye. “But you must never throw it away. And you must never speak our names. If you do, the glory is over, and you’ll never see us again.”

Halvor swore he never would.

“I wish I were at home, and home were here!” he said. And as he wished, so it was. Before he knew it, he was standing outside his parents’ cottage.

It was dusk. When the old couple saw such a fine, grand stranger come through the door, they were so flustered that they began to bow and curtsy.

Halvor asked if he might stay the night.

“Oh, no, that would never do,” they said. “We’re not set up for the likes of you. We haven’t a thing a gentleman could want. You’d best go up to the farm. It isn’t far. You can see the chimney from here, and they’ve plenty of everything up there.”

Halvor wouldn’t hear of it. He wanted to stay. But the old folk kept on at him. Up at the farm he could have food and drink, and down here they hadn’t so much as a chair to offer him.

“No,” said Halvor. “I’m not going up there before tomorrow morning. Let me stay here tonight. I can sit by the fire.”

They couldn’t very well say no to that. So Halvor sat down by the fire and raked about in the ashes, just as he used to in the days when he lay at home and idled.

They talked of this and that, and told him all the news, and after a while he asked if they had ever had any children.

Yes, they had had a boy called Halvor. But where he had wandered off to they couldn’t say, nor whether he was alive or dead.

“Couldn’t that be me?” said Halvor.

“Not likely,” said the old woman, and heaved herself up. “Our Halvor was so lazy he never lifted a finger, and so ragged that one rag knocked the other senseless. A fine gentleman like you could never have come of him, sir.”

A little later she went over to the fire to rake up the embers. The glow fell on Halvor’s face, just as it used to when he sat at home scraping in the ashes, and she knew him.

“Why, it’s you, Halvor!” she cried.

The old folk were beside themselves with joy, and Halvor had to tell them everything that had happened to him. His mother was so proud that she wanted to take him up to the farm that very minute and show him off to the girls there, who had always been so high and mighty.

She went first and Halvor came after. Up at the farm she told them that Halvor had come home, and they should just see how fine he was. He looked like a prince, she said.

“Not likely,” said the girls, tossing their heads. “He’ll be the same ragamuffin he always was.”

Just then Halvor walked in. The girls had been sitting by the fire with their shifts off, picking the fleas out of them, and they were so taken aback that they fled in nothing but their skirts and left their shifts lying in the hearth. When they came back in, they were so ashamed they hardly dared look at Halvor, though they had always been so proud and haughty with him before.

“Well,” said Halvor, “you’ve always thought yourselves so fine and pretty that nobody could touch you. But you should see the eldest princess I set free. Next to her you look like goose girls. The middle one is prettier still. But the youngest, my sweetheart, is lovelier than the sun and the moon. I wish to God they were here, and then you’d see!”

He had no sooner said it than there they stood. Then Halvor felt sick at heart, for now he remembered what they had told him.

At the farm there was a great feast for the princesses, and a fuss was made of them. But they didn’t want to stay.

“We want to go down and see your parents,” they told Halvor, “and then we want to go out and look around.”

So he went with them. Outside the farm they came to a big lake, and close by the water there was a lovely green slope, all dotted with flowers. There the princesses wanted to sit and rest a while, because it was so pleasant to look out over the water, they said.

They sat down, and after a while the youngest princess said, “Come here, Halvor. Let me comb your hair a little.”

Halvor laid his head in her lap, and she combed his hair with her fingers, and it wasn’t long before he was asleep. Then she lifted his hand, drew off the wishing ring and slid another in its place. She did it calmly and without hurrying, and her fingers closed round the true ring. Out on the lake the water lay still and held the whole sky.

Then she held out her hands to her sisters.

“Hold on to me, as I hold on to you,” she said, “and I wish we were at Soria Moria Castle!”

When Halvor woke, the slope was empty, and he knew well enough that he had lost the princesses. He wept and wailed, and he was so miserable that nobody could comfort him. Whatever his parents said, he wouldn’t stay. He said goodbye and told them they would never see him again, for if he couldn’t find the princesses, life wasn’t worth living.

He had three hundred silver coins left. He put them in his pocket and set off.

When he had gone a way, he met a man with a decent sort of horse. Halvor wanted to buy it and began to haggle.

“Well, I hadn’t really thought of selling,” said the man, “but if we could come to terms—”

Halvor asked what he wanted for it.

“I didn’t give much for it, and it isn’t worth much,” said the man. “It’s a good horse to ride, but it’s no great shakes in harness. Still, it’ll carry your food bag, and you as well, if you walk every other mile.”

In the end they settled on a price. Halvor slung his bag over the horse, and then he walked a mile and rode a mile. In the evening he came to a green meadow with a big tree, and there he sat down. He turned the horse loose to graze, but he didn’t lie down to sleep; he only got out his food bag. As soon as it grew light he was off again, for he could find no rest.

All that day he walked and rode through a great forest, where green glades shone out between the trees. He didn’t know where he was, and he didn’t know where he was going. He never stopped longer than it took the horse to crop a little grass in one of the glades and himself to eat a mouthful from his bag. He walked and he rode, and the forest never seemed to end.

But at dusk on the second day he saw a light between the trees.

“I hope somebody’s still up,” thought Halvor, “so I can get warm and have a bite to eat.”

It was a wretched little hut, and through the window he could see an old couple inside. They were very old, and their heads were as grey as doves, and the old woman had such a long nose that she sat by the fire and used it for a poker.

“Good evening!” said Halvor.

“Good evening!” said the old woman. “But what brings you here? No Christian folk have been this way for more than a hundred years.”

Halvor told her he was going to Soria Moria Castle and asked if she knew the way.

“No,” said the old woman, “that I don’t. But the Moon will be up any minute, and I’ll ask him. He’s sure to know. He must have seen it, since he shines on everything.”

When the Moon stood bright and clear above the treetops, the old woman went outside.

“Moon, Moon!” she screeched. “Can you tell me the way to Soria Moria Castle?”

“No,” said the Moon, “I can’t. The time I shone there, a cloud was in the way.”

“Wait a little longer,” the old woman told Halvor. “The West Wind will be along soon. He’s bound to know, for he blows and gusts into every nook and corner.”

Then she caught sight of the horse. “Well, well! Have you got a horse as well?” she said. “Turn the poor beast out into the paddock, and don’t leave it standing at the door and starving! But wouldn’t you like to swap it with me? We’ve a pair of old boots here that go fifteen miles at every step. You can have them for the horse, and you’ll get to Soria Moria Castle all the sooner.”

Halvor agreed at once, and the old woman was so delighted with the horse she was ready to dance. “Now I can ride to church like everybody else!” she said.

Halvor couldn’t rest and wanted to be off at once, but the old woman said there was no hurry. “Lie down on the bench and have a nap,” she said. “We haven’t got a bed for you. I’ll keep a lookout for the West Wind.”

All at once the West Wind came roaring along, so that the walls creaked. Out went the old woman.

“West Wind, West Wind! Can you tell me the way to Soria Moria Castle? There’s one here who needs to go there.”

“Yes, I know it well,” said the West Wind. “I’m on my way there now, to dry the clothes for the wedding. If he’s quick on his feet, he can come with me.”

Out went Halvor.

“You’ll have to hurry if you want to keep me company,” said the West Wind, and off they went, far away, over hill and heath, over fell and fjord, and even in the old woman’s boots Halvor had all he could do to keep up.

“Now I haven’t time to go with you any further,” said the West Wind. “I’ve got to go and flatten a stretch of spruce forest before I get to the drying green. But if you follow the edge of the ridge, you’ll come to some girls washing clothes, and then you haven’t far to go to Soria Moria Castle.”

A little later Halvor came upon the girls at their washing, and they asked if he had seen anything of the West Wind. He was supposed to be coming to dry the clothes for the wedding.

“Oh yes,” said Halvor. “He’s just gone off to knock down a stretch of spruce forest. He won’t be long.” Then he asked them the way to Soria Moria Castle.

They put him on the right road, and when he came near the castle, it was so thick with horses and people that the whole place swarmed. But Halvor was so ragged and torn from following the West Wind through bush and bog that he kept out of sight, and he didn’t come forward until the last day of the wedding, when they sat down to dinner.

The great hall blazed with torches. As the custom was, the bride was to be toasted, and the cupbearer had to drink to every guest in turn: bride and bridegroom, knights and squires. At long last the cupbearer reached Halvor, who stood at the far edge of the hall, and held out the cup to him. Halvor drank the toast. Then, with a steady hand, he dropped in the ring the princess had put on his finger by the lake, and it caught the light as it sank. He asked the cupbearer to give the bride his greetings and carry the cup up to her.

When the bride looked into the cup, she rose from the table at once.

“Who has best deserved one of us?” she said. “The man who set us free, or the man who sits here as bridegroom?”

There could only be one answer to that, everybody said. And when Halvor heard it, he wasn’t long getting out of his rags and dressing himself up as a bridegroom.

“Yes, there’s the right one!” cried the youngest princess the moment she saw him. And she tossed the other one out of the window and held her wedding with Halvor.