Once upon a time, there was a woman who had a deaf husband, and he was a good soul; but because of this, she was more fond of the boy in the other house, who they called Paul of the Second House. The servant boy for the deaf man noticed well that there was something going on between the two of them, so he said to the woman one day, "Do you dare to bet ten dollars, ma'am, that I can make you confess your own shame?" "Yes, I dare," she said, and so they bet ten dollars.

One day, when the boy and the deaf man were on the barn floor, threshing, the boy noticed that Paul of the Second House came to the woman. He said nothing; but long before dinnertime, he suddenly turned towards the barn door and shouted, "Yes," pretending it was a loud call. "Oh, are we going in already then?" said the man, who hadn't noticed anything. "Yes, I'd say we do, since the wife is calling," said the boy. When they reached the hallway, the boy started coughing and stomping to warn the woman so she could hide Paul of the Second House. When they entered, there was a dish of sour cream porridge on the table. "Well, well, ma'am!" said the man, "Are we having sour cream porridge today?" "Oh yes, you are," she said, angry and agitated.

After they finished eating and went out again, she said to Paul, "This boy is the devil; this was his fault. But now you should see to leaving, and I'll bring lunch down to you in the meadow." The boy listened to all of this from the hallway. "Father," he said, "I think it's best we go down to the valley and fix the ski trail piece that's blown down, as their pigs from the other house are rooting up our meadow." "Yes, we should probably do that," said the man, as he did everything they told him to.

At lunchtime, the woman came rushing down to the meadow with something under her apron. "Well, well, ma'am! I don't think you are yourself anymore," said the man; "Are we having lunch, too?" "Oh yes, you might as well," she said, even more agitated. And they ate well, indulging in soft flatbread with butter, and even had liquor with it.

"I'll take some to Paul of the Second House too, ma'am," said the boy, "because he probably didn't get any lunch." "Yes, do that," said the woman, suddenly softened again. On the way, the boy picked up the flatbread and dropped a crumb here and there as he went. To Paul of the Second House, he said, "You better watch yourself, because our husband has noticed that you visit the woman rather often; he doesn't like it much, and now he swore he'll strike you with the axe as soon as he sees you." Paul became frightened and uneasy, and the boy returned to the man.

"There’s something unfinished on Paul's plow," he said, "and he asked if you'd take the axe and come fix it." So the man took the axe and went, but Paul of the Second House didn't spot him before he ran off as fast as he could. The man turned and inspected the plow from every angle, and when he couldn’t find anything wrong with it, he went back, picking up the flatbread crumbs the boy had dropped along the way. The woman stood for a while, wondering what the man was collecting.

"Oh, he's likely picking up stones," said the boy, "because he's noticed that this Paul of the Second House visits us so often, and the husband isn't fond of it. Now he's sworn to stone ma'am to death." The woman scurried off as fast as she could. "What's ma'am rushing off for?" asked the man when he arrived. "Oh, it’s probably because there's a fire at home," said the boy.

The man followed, and the woman ran and screamed, "Oh, don't kill me, don't kill me, and I'll never let Paul of the Second House come to me again!" "Now the ten dollars are mine," shouted the boy.