Once upon a time there was a farmer and his wife who had fields to sow, but no seed to sow them with and no money to buy any. All they owned in the world was one cow. The farmer was to take her to town and sell her, so that they could buy seed. But when it came to it, his wife didn’t dare let him go. She was afraid he would drink the money.

“I’ll go myself,” she said. So she led the cow out of the cowshed, and took a hen along into the bargain.

Just outside the town she met a butcher.

“Is that cow for sale, Mother?” he asked.

“She is,” said the farmer’s wife.

“And what do you want for her?”

“I suppose I must have a penny for the cow,” she said. “But the hen you can have for ten dalers.”

The butcher looked at the hen. She hadn’t many feathers left.

“The hen I’ve no use for,” he said. “You’ll get rid of her in town, I’m sure. But you shall have your penny for the cow.”

So she sold the cow for a penny. But there wasn’t a soul in the whole town who would give ten dalers for a dry, scabby hen, and towards evening she trudged back to the butcher.

“I can’t get rid of this hen, Father,” she said. “You’ll have to take her too, since you got the cow.”

“Oh, we’ll find a way,” said the butcher. He asked her in, set food in front of her and poured her a glass of brandy. Then he poured another, and another, until she was clean out of her wits.

While she lay sleeping it off, the butcher dipped her in a barrel of tar and rolled her in a heap of feathers.

When she woke, she was feathers from head to toe. She looked at her arms. She looked at her legs.

“Is it me, or isn’t it me?” she said. “No, it can’t be me. It must be some great strange bird. But how am I to find out whether it’s me, or whether it isn’t?” She thought hard. “I know! If the calves lick me, and the dog doesn’t bark at me when I get home, then it’s me.”

She was hardly into the yard before the dog caught sight of her. It barked and howled as if the place were full of thieves.

“No, then it can’t be me,” she said.

She went to the cowshed. The calves stretched their noses towards her, sniffed, and shied away into the corners. They knew the smell of tar.

“No, it isn’t me,” she said. “It must be a strange bird.”

So she climbed up onto the storehouse roof, spread her arms and began to flap them like wings. She meant to fly.

When her husband saw that, he came out with his rifle and took aim, while the dog leapt and barked at his heels.

“Don’t shoot, don’t shoot!” cried his wife. “It’s me!”

“If it’s you,” said the farmer, “don’t stand up there like a goat. Come down and give an account of yourself.”

She climbed down. But she hadn’t a penny to show for the cow. The one the butcher had paid her had gone somewhere in the brandy.

“Well,” said the farmer. “You’re no more than twice as mad as you were.”

He grew so angry that he swore he would walk out on the whole lot and never come back. Unless, that is, he came across three other wives who were just as mad.

Off he stamped. When he had gone a good way, he came to a new log house that still smelled of fresh-cut pine. A woman was running in and out of the door with an empty sieve. Every time she ran in, she threw her apron over the sieve as if there were something in it, and inside she tipped it out on the floor.

“What are you doing, Mother?” asked the farmer.

“Oh, I only want to carry in a little sunshine,” she said. “But I can’t make it out. When I’m outside, I have the sun in the sieve, and by the time I’m in, I’ve lost it. In my old house I had sun enough, and I never carried in so much as a sunbeam. If anyone could get me some sun, I’d gladly give him three hundred dalers.”

“Have you got an axe?” said the farmer. “Then you shall have sun.”

She brought him an axe. He went into the gloomy room, spat on his hands and set about the wall, and the chips flew. The carpenters, you see, had forgotten the windows. Just as the woman came running in and tipped out her sieve once more, the axe broke through, and a broad beam of sunlight fell across the floor, right where she had emptied it. She stared at the sunlight. Then she stared at the sieve.

The farmer got his three hundred dalers.

That’s one, he thought, and went on his way.

After a while he heard the most dreadful yelling and screeching from a house by the road. In he went. There stood a woman, beating her husband over the head with a washing bat. Over his head she had pulled a shirt with no neck hole.

“Are you trying to kill your husband, Mother?” he asked.

“Not at all,” she said. “I only want a neck hole in this shirt.”

The husband yelled and wailed from inside it. “God help anyone in this house who needs a new shirt! If anyone could teach my wife to get a neck hole some other way, I’d gladly give him three hundred dalers.”

“That’s soon done,” said the farmer. “Just fetch me some scissors.”

He got the scissors, snipped a hole, and set off again with his money.

That’s two, he said to himself.

At long last he came to a farm, where he thought he would rest a while, and in he went.

“And where are you from, Father?” asked the woman of the house.

“From Ringerike,” he said.

“Oh, my, my! From Himmerike?” she cried. Himmerike is an old Norwegian word for the Kingdom of Heaven, and to her ears it sounded near enough. “Then you must know Per the Second, my late husband, God rest him!”

She had been married three times, and all three husbands had been called Per. The first and the last were bad lots. But Per the Second had been a kind man, and so she reckoned he was the only one of them who could have got into heaven.

“Oh, I know him well,” said the farmer from Ringerike.

“And how is he getting on up there?”

“Poorly,” said the farmer. “He goes from farm to farm with no food in his belly and no clothes on his back. As for money, don’t even ask.”

“God have mercy!” cried Per the Second’s widow. “He needn’t go about in rags, a man who left so much behind!”

She took him into the storehouse. Per the Second’s clothes hung from the rafters, row upon row, and on the floor stood a heavy chest. She threw back the lid. It was full to the brim with bright silver coins.

“Take it all to him,” she said, and she pushed the chest towards him with both hands. “And take the horse and cart out there to carry it. He can keep the horse up there, and sit in the cart and drive from farm to farm. He shouldn’t have to walk.”

Through the open door the farmer could see a blue horse standing ready in the shafts. He took the chest, steady as you like, and promised it would reach Per the Second safe and sound.

He got a whole cartload of clothes and the chest of silver, and as much food and drink as he cared to take. Then he climbed up onto the cart and drove off.

That’s three, he said to himself.

But out in the field, ploughing, was the widow’s third husband, Per the Third. When he saw a stranger drive off from the farm with horse and cart, he went home and asked his wife who it was that had just gone off with the blue horse.

“Oh, him,” she said. “That was a man from Heaven. He says Per the Second, God rest him, is so badly off he goes from farm to farm up there with neither clothes nor money. So I sent him all those old clothes from the storehouse, and the old money chest with the silver in it.”

Per the Third saw at once which way the wind was blowing. He saddled a horse and set off at a gallop.

It wasn’t long before he was close behind the cart. But when the farmer from Ringerike heard hoofbeats, he turned horse and cart into the thicket, plucked a handful of hair from the horse’s tail, and ran up a little hill. There he tied the horsehair to a birch. Then he lay down on his back beneath it and gazed up at the clouds.

“Well, I never!” he said, as if to himself, when Per the Third came riding up. “I’ve never seen anything so strange! No, never in all my days have I seen the like!”

Per got off his horse and stood looking at him a while, wondering whether the fellow was simple, or what on earth this was. At last he asked, “What are you lying there gawping at?”

“Never have I seen the like!” said the other. “A man just went straight up to Heaven on a blue horse. You can see the tail hair still caught in the birch, and up there in the clouds is his blue horse.”

Per looked at the clouds, and then at him. “All I can see is horsehair in a birch tree,” he said.

“Well, of course you can’t, standing there,” said the other. “Come and lie down here and look straight up. And whatever you do, don’t take your eyes off the clouds.”

So Per lay down in the grass and stared at the clouds until his eyes streamed. Meanwhile the farmer from Ringerike rose without a sound, took Per’s horse, and made off with it and the cartload too. Only when the rumble of wheels came from the road did Per leap up, and by then he was so flustered at losing his horses that he didn’t think of giving chase until it was far too late.

Now he had neither horse nor cart nor silver. But when he got home and his wife asked what he had done with the horse, he said:

“I sent that along too, for Per the Second. It didn’t seem right for him to sit in a cart, rattling from farm to farm in Heaven. Now he can sell the cart and buy himself a carriage.”

“Well, thank you!” said his wife. “I never thought you were such a kind man.”

As for the farmer from Ringerike, he came home under a grey sky with six hundred dalers and a cartload of clothes and silver. The fields had all been ploughed, and there was his wife out in the last of them with a wooden bucket on her hip, scattering something white in wide, glittering arcs. Empty sacks lay at the end of the furrow. The first thing he asked her was where she had found the seed.

“Oh,” she said, “I’ve always heard: sow nothing, reap nothing. So I sowed the salt the trader from the north left in our storehouse. If only we get a drop of rain soon, I expect it’ll come up nicely.”

“Mad you are, and mad you’ll stay as long as you live,” said the farmer. “But it’s all the same to me now. The others are no better.”