Once upon a time there was a poor couple who lived in a wretched hut where there was nothing but the blackest poverty. They had nothing to bite and nothing to burn. But if they were short of everything else, they had been blessed with children, and every year brought one more. Now another was on the way.

The husband was not pleased. He went about grumbling and growling, and said that for once, surely, they’d had enough of the Lord’s gifts. When his wife’s time came, he took himself off to the forest for firewood, because he had no wish to see the new squaller. He’d hear it soon enough, he said, when it started bawling for food.

He was hardly out of sight before his wife gave birth to a fine baby boy. The moment the boy was in the world, he had a good look round the room.

“Mother dear,” he said, “give me some of my brothers’ old clothes and food for a couple of days, and I’ll go out into the world and try my luck. You’ve got children enough as it is, I see.”

“Lord help me, my son,” said his mother. “You’re far too little. It’ll never do.”

But the little fellow wouldn’t give up. He begged and pleaded until his mother had to let him have some old rags and a bit of food tied up in a bundle, and off he went into the world, as cheerful and confident as you please.

He was barely out of the door when she gave birth to another boy. This one, too, had a good look round the room.

“Mother dear,” he said, “give me some of my brothers’ old clothes and food for a couple of days, and I’ll go out into the world and find my twin brother. You’ve got children enough as it is.”

“Lord help me, you poor little thing, you’re far too small,” said his mother. “It’ll never do.”

It did no good. The little one begged and pleaded until he too got some old rags and a bundle of food, and off he marched into the world to find his twin.

So the father never did hear them bawling for food.

The younger twin hadn’t gone far before he spotted his brother a good way ahead, and he shouted to him to stop.

“Hold on, you!” he said. “You’re charging along as if someone were paying you for it. You might at least have said hello to your baby brother before you went off into the world.”

The elder stopped and looked back. When the younger had caught up and explained how it was that they were brothers, he went on, “But now let’s sit down and see what Mother has packed for us.” And so they did.

A little further on they came to a brook running through a green meadow, and there the younger said they ought to give each other names.

“We had to rush off so fast there wasn’t time at home,” he said, “so we’ll have to do it here.”

“What do you want to be called, then?” asked the elder.

“I want to be called Littlecourt,” said the younger. “And you? What do you want to be called?”

“I want to be called King Lavring,” said the elder.

So they christened each other with water from the brook and walked on. After a while they came to a crossroads, and there they agreed to part and each take his own road. They did, but they had only gone a little way when they met again. They parted once more, and a little later the same thing happened: they ran into each other before they knew it. And it went the same way the third time. In the end they agreed that one should go east and the other west.

“But if you ever get into real trouble,” said King Lavring, “call me three times, and I’ll come and help you. Only you mustn’t call until you’re in the very direst need!”

“Then it’ll be a while before we see each other,” said Littlecourt.

Then they said goodbye, and Littlecourt went east and King Lavring went west.

When Littlecourt had walked a good while on his own, along a path through the forest, he met an old, old hag, bent double, who had only one eye. Littlecourt stole it.

“Ow, ow!” screamed the hag. “Where’s my eye gone?”

“What will you give me to get it back?” said Littlecourt.

“I’ll give you a sword that can beat a whole army, however big it is,” said the hag.

“Hand it over, then,” said Littlecourt.

The hag gave him the sword, and she got her eye back.

Littlecourt walked on, and after a while he met another old, old hag, bent double, with only one eye. Littlecourt stole it before she knew what was happening.

“Ow, ow! Where’s my eye gone?” screamed the hag.

“What will you give me to get it back?” said Littlecourt.

“I’ll give you a ship that can sail over fresh water and salt water, over mountains and deep valleys,” said the hag.

“Hand it over, then,” said Littlecourt.

The hag gave him a tiny little ship, small enough to slip into his pocket. Then she got her eye back, and they went their separate ways.

After a long walk he met a third old, old hag, bent double, with only one eye. Littlecourt stole that one too, and when the hag shrieked and carried on and wanted to know where her eye had gone, he said, “What will you give me to get it back?”

“I’ll give you the knack of brewing a hundred tons of malt in a single brew.”

For that knack the hag got her eye back, and they went their separate ways. Now Littlecourt had a sword, a ship in his pocket and a knack for brewing, and he wasn’t yet a day old.

When Littlecourt had gone a little further, it struck him that it might be worth trying out the ship. He took it out of his pocket and set one foot in it. At once it grew a good deal bigger, and when he put in the other foot, it was as big as the ships that sail the sea.

“Now sail over fresh water and salt water, over mountains and deep valleys,” said Littlecourt, “and don’t stop till you reach the King’s manor!”

Off went the ship, as fast as a bird in the air, and it didn’t stop till it came to rest a little below the King’s manor.

People had been standing at the windows of the manor watching him come sailing, and they were so astonished that they all ran down to see who on earth came flying through the air in a ship. But while they were running, Littlecourt had stepped out of it, and the moment he did, it shrank to the size it had been when the hag gave it to him. He put it back in his pocket. So when they got to the shore, there was nothing to see but a small, ragged boy standing on the beach.

The King asked where he came from. The boy said he didn’t know, and he didn’t know how he’d got there either. But he asked so very nicely for a place at the manor. If there was nothing else for him to do, he said, he could carry wood and water for the kitchen maid. And that he was allowed to do.

When Littlecourt came up to the manor, he saw that everything was hung with black, outside and in, walls and roof alike. He asked the kitchen maid what it meant.

“I’ll tell you,” said the kitchen maid. “The King’s daughter was promised to three sea trolls a long time ago, and next Thursday evening the first of them is coming to fetch her. Sir Red has sworn he’ll save her, but heaven knows if he can. So you can see why there’s nothing but grief in this house.”

When Thursday evening came, Sir Red led the princess, dressed in mourning black, down to the shore, for that was where she was to meet the troll, and he was to stay there and guard her. I don’t suppose he did the troll much harm, though. The princess had hardly sat down at the water’s edge before Sir Red climbed up into a big tree that grew there and hid among the branches as best he could. The princess wept and begged him with all her heart not to leave her, but Sir Red paid no attention.

“Better one life lost than two,” said Sir Red.

Meanwhile Littlecourt asked the kitchen maid ever so nicely if he might go down to the shore for a little while.

“Oh, what do you want down there?” said the kitchen maid. “You’ve no business there.”

“Oh, please, dear, let me go,” said Littlecourt. “I’d so like to go down and have a bit of fun with the other boys.”

“Well, go on, then,” said the kitchen maid. “But mind you’re back by the time the supper pot goes over the fire and the roast goes on the spit. And bring in a good armful of wood when you come.”

Littlecourt promised he would, and ran down to the shore.

Just as he reached the spot where the King’s daughter sat, the sea troll came storming ashore from his ship with a whistling and a roaring all around him. He was so huge and so bloated that he was horrible to look at, and he had five heads.

“Fire!” screamed the troll.

“Fire back!” said Littlecourt.

“Can you fight?” roared the troll.

“If I can’t, I can learn,” said Littlecourt.

Then the troll swung at him with a great thick iron bar he held in his fist, so hard that the earth flew five yards into the air.

“Pah!” said Littlecourt. “Call that a blow? Now you’ll see a blow from me!”

He seized the sword he had got from the old hag and struck at the troll, and all five heads flew off across the sand.

When the princess saw that she was saved, she was so happy she didn’t know what to do with herself. She hopped and she danced.

“Now sleep a little while in my lap,” she said to Littlecourt, and while he lay there, she dressed him in a garment of gold.

Now that there was no more danger about, it didn’t take Sir Red long to climb down from the tree. He threatened the princess until she had to promise to say that he was the one who had saved her; if she didn’t, he would kill her. Then he cut the lung and the tongue out of the troll, wrapped them in his handkerchief, and led the princess back to the manor. If nobody had made much of him before, they certainly did now. The King couldn’t think how to honour him enough, and from then on Sir Red always sat at the King’s right hand at table.

As for Littlecourt, he had pulled his rags on over the gold and gone out to the troll’s ship, where he helped himself to a great heap of gold and silver hoops. Then he trotted back to the manor. When the kitchen maid saw all that gold and silver, she was quite alarmed.

“But Littlecourt, dear,” she said, “wherever did you get all this?” For she was afraid he hadn’t come by it honestly.

“Oh,” said Littlecourt, “I went home for a bit, and these hoops had fallen off some buckets there, so I brought them along for you.”

When the kitchen maid heard they were for her, she asked no more questions. She thanked Littlecourt, and all was well again.

The second Thursday evening it all went the same way. Everyone was sunk in grief, but Sir Red said that if he had been able to save the King’s daughter from one troll, he could certainly save her from another, and he led her down to the shore. I don’t suppose he did that troll much harm either. When the time came to expect it, he said just as before, “Better one life lost than two,” and up the tree he went.

Littlecourt asked the kitchen maid again if he might go down to the shore for a little while.

“Oh, what do you want down there?” said the kitchen maid.

“Oh, please, dear, let me go,” said Littlecourt. “I’d so like to go down and have a bit of fun with the other boys.”

So he was allowed to go that time too, but first he had to promise to be back when the roast needed turning, and to bring a big armful of wood with him.

Littlecourt had barely reached the shore when the troll came storming in with a whistling and a roaring all around him. He was twice as big as the first, and he had ten heads.

“Fire!” screamed the troll.

“Fire back!” said Littlecourt.

“Can you fight?” roared the troll.

“If I can’t, I can learn,” said Littlecourt.

Then the troll swung at him with his iron bar, which was even bigger than the first troll’s, and the earth flew ten yards into the air.

“Pah!” said Littlecourt. “Call that a blow? Now you’ll see a blow from me!”

He seized his sword and struck at the troll, and all ten heads went dancing off across the sand.

Then the King’s daughter said to him again, “Sleep a little while in my lap,” and while Littlecourt lay there, she dressed him in a garment of silver.

As soon as Sir Red could tell the danger was over, he climbed down from the tree and threatened the princess until she promised once again to say it was he who had saved her. Then he took the tongue and the lung from the troll, put them in his handkerchief, and led the King’s daughter home. There was joy and gladness at the manor, you may be sure, and the King hardly knew how to heap enough honour and glory on Sir Red.

But Littlecourt brought home another armful of gold and silver hoops from the troll’s ship. The kitchen maid clapped her hands and wondered wherever he had found all that gold and silver. Littlecourt said he had been home for a bit, and these were hoops that had fallen off some buckets, and he had brought them for her.

When the third Thursday evening came, it went exactly as it had the first two times. The whole manor was hung with black, and everyone was sunk in grief. But Sir Red said he didn’t see what they had to be so afraid of. If he had saved the King’s daughter from two trolls, he could surely save her from the third. So he led her down to the shore, but as the time drew near for the troll to come, he climbed the tree and hid again. The princess wept and begged him to stay, but it was no use. He stuck to his old song.

“Better one life lost than two,” said Sir Red.

That evening, too, Littlecourt asked if he might go down to the shore.

“Oh, what do you want down there?” said the kitchen maid.

But he begged for so long that at last she let him go, as long as he promised to be back in the kitchen when the roast needed turning.

He had hardly reached the shore when the troll came, whistling and roaring. He was much, much bigger than either of the others, and he had fifteen heads.

“Fire!” roared the troll.

“Fire back!” said Littlecourt.

“Can you fight?” screamed the troll.

“If I can’t, I can learn,” said Littlecourt.

“I’ll teach you!” screamed the troll, and he swung his iron bar so that the earth flew fifteen yards into the air.

“Pah!” said Littlecourt. “Call that a blow? Now you’ll see a blow from me!”

With that he seized his sword and struck at the troll, and all fifteen heads went dancing off across the sand.

Now the princess was saved, and she thanked Littlecourt and blessed him for rescuing her.

“Now sleep a little while in my lap,” she said, and while he lay there, she dressed him in a garment of brass.

“But how are we going to show them it was you who saved me?” said the King’s daughter.

“I’ll tell you,” said Littlecourt. “When Sir Red has taken you home and says he’s the one who saved you, you know he’s going to get you and half the kingdom. But on the wedding day, when they ask who you want to pour your drink, you must say, ‘I want the little boy from the kitchen who carries wood and water for the kitchen maid.’ When I pour, I’ll spill a drop on his plate but none on yours. Then he’ll get angry and hit me, and we’ll keep that up three times. But the third time you must say, ‘Shame on you for striking my true love! He saved me, and he’s the one I’ll have!’”

Then Littlecourt ran back to the manor as he had the other times. But first he went out to the troll’s ship again and took a good deal of gold and silver and other precious things, and out of it he gave the kitchen maid another whole armful of gold and silver hoops.

No sooner did Sir Red see that all danger was past than he climbed down from the tree and threatened the King’s daughter until she promised to say it was he who had saved her. Then he led her back to the manor, and if they had made much of him before, it was nothing to what they made of him now. The King could think of nothing but how to honour the man who had saved his daughter from all three trolls. It was settled, he said: Sir Red should have both her and half the kingdom.

On the wedding day the hall was packed with guests. The black hangings had come down, most of them anyway, and the bridal table groaned with food and goblets. Sir Red sat at the head of it in his best armour. But the princess asked if she might have the little boy from the kitchen, the one who carried wood and water for the kitchen maid, to pour the drinks.

“What do you want with that sooty little ragamuffin in here?” said Sir Red.

But the princess said she wanted him to pour and no one else, and in the end she got her way. After that, everything went just as Littlecourt and the King’s daughter had agreed. He spilled a drop on Sir Red’s plate but none on hers, and each time Sir Red went red with rage and struck him. At the first blow, the rags Littlecourt wore in the kitchen fell off him. At the second, the brass garment fell off. At the third, the silver garment fell off, and there he stood in the garment of gold, so bright and splendid that light shone from him.

The princess rose from her seat. “Shame on you for striking my true love!” she said. “He saved me, and he’s the one I’ll have!”

Sir Red swore and cursed and insisted that he had saved her. But the King said, “Whoever saved my daughter must have something to show for it.”

At that, Sir Red ran off to fetch his handkerchief with the lungs and tongues in it, and Littlecourt fetched all the gold and silver and precious things he had taken from the troll ship. Each of them laid his proof before the King.

“Whoever owns such costly things of gold and silver and precious stones,” said the King, “must have killed the trolls, for such things aren’t to be had from anyone else.”

So Sir Red was thrown into the snake pit, and Littlecourt was to have the princess and half the kingdom.

One day the King and Littlecourt were out walking, and Littlecourt asked the King whether he had ever had any other children.

“Yes,” said the King. “I had another daughter. But a troll took her, because there was no one who could save her. Now you’re to have one of my daughters; but if you can save the one the troll took, you’re welcome to her as well, and the other half of the kingdom too.”

“I suppose I’ll have to try,” said Littlecourt. “But I’ll need an iron cable five hundred yards long, and five hundred men, and food for them for fifteen weeks. I’m going a long way out to sea.”

He could certainly have all that, said the King, but he was afraid he had no ship big enough to carry it.

“I have a ship of my own,” said Littlecourt, and he took the one the hag had given him out of his pocket.

The King laughed and thought he was joking. But Littlecourt only asked for what he had ordered, and said the King would soon see.

So they brought it all, and Littlecourt told them to put the cable in the ship first. But there was no one who could lift it, and there wasn’t room for more than a few to stand round the tiny ship at once. Then Littlecourt took hold of one end of the cable himself and laid a few links of it in the ship, and as he fed the cable in, the ship grew bigger and bigger. In the end it was so big that there was plenty of room for the cable and the five hundred men and their food, and Littlecourt as well.

“Now sail over fresh water and salt water, over mountains and deep valleys,” Littlecourt told the ship, “and don’t stop till you come to where the King’s daughter is!”

And off it went at once, whistling and shrieking over land and sea.

When they had sailed a long, long way, the ship stopped in the middle of the ocean.

“Well, here we are,” said Littlecourt. “How we get away again is another matter.”

He took the iron cable and tied one end round his waist.

“Now I must go to the bottom,” he said. “But when I give the cable a hard tug and want to come up, you must all haul together like one man. If you don’t, there’ll be no more hope for you than for me.”

And with that he jumped overboard, so that the yellow spray flew up around him. He sank and sank, and at last he reached the bottom. There he saw a great mountain with a door in it, and when he went in, he found the other princess. She was sitting sewing, but when she saw Littlecourt, she clapped her hands together.

“Oh, thank God!” she cried. “I haven’t seen a Christian soul since I came here.”

“Well, I’ve come for you,” said Littlecourt.

“Oh, you’ll never get me away,” said the King’s daughter. “Don’t even think of it. If the troll sees you, he’ll kill you.”

“I’m glad you mentioned him,” said Littlecourt. “Where is he? I’d rather like to see him.”

So the King’s daughter told him the troll was out looking for someone who could brew a hundred tons of malt in a single brew. There was to be a feast at the troll’s, and nothing less would do.

“I can do that,” said Littlecourt.

“If only the troll weren’t so hot-tempered, I could tell him so,” said the princess. “But he’s so savage, I’m afraid he’ll tear you to pieces the moment he comes in. Still, I’ll try to think of something. You hide in that little closet for now, and we’ll see how it goes.”

So Littlecourt did, and he had hardly crept into the closet and hidden himself before the troll came home.

“Ugh!” said the troll. “I smell Christian blood in here!”

“Yes, a bird flew over the roof with a Christian man’s bone in its beak, and it dropped it down the chimney,” said the King’s daughter. “I hurried to get it out, but I expect that’s what you can smell.”

“Yes, I expect that’s it,” said the troll.

Then the princess asked if he had found anyone who could brew a hundred tons of malt in a single brew.

“No,” said the troll. “There’s no one who can.”

“A little while ago there was someone in here who said he could,” said the King’s daughter.

“Oh, you’re always so clever, you are,” said the troll. “Then why did you let him go? You knew I wanted someone like that.”

“Well, I didn’t let him go, either,” said the King’s daughter. “But Father is so hot-tempered, so I hid him in the closet. If Father hasn’t found anyone, he’s still in there.”

“Let him come in,” said the troll.

When Littlecourt came out, the troll asked if it was true that he could brew a hundred tons of malt in a single brew.

“Yes,” said Littlecourt.

“Lucky I got hold of you, then,” said the troll. “Get to work at once. And God help you if you don’t brew the ale strong!”

“Oh, it’ll have some taste to it,” said Littlecourt, and he started brewing straight away. “But I need more trolls to carry water,” he said. “The ones I’ve got are no use.”

So he got more, so many that the place swarmed with them, and then the brewing really got going.

When the brew was ready, they all had to taste it, of course, the troll himself first and then the others. Littlecourt stood by the steaming vat with the ladle and filled their tankards. But he had brewed it so strong that they dropped dead like flies as they drank, and the tankards went rolling across the floor. The princess watched from the closet door. In the end there was no one left but a miserable old hag lying behind the oven.

“Oh, you poor thing!” said Littlecourt. “You must have a taste too!” And he went and scraped the bottom of the brewing vat with the ladle and gave it to her. And so he was rid of every last one of them.

As he stood there looking around, he caught sight of a big chest. He filled it with gold and silver, then tied the cable round himself and the princess and the chest, and gave it a mighty tug. And the crew hauled them all up safe and sound.

Once Littlecourt was back on board, he said, “Now sail over salt water and fresh water, over mountains and deep valleys, and don’t stop till you reach the King’s manor!” And the ship shot off at once, so that the foam stood yellow around it.

When the people at the manor saw the ship, they were quick to come down to meet it with singing and music, and they welcomed Littlecourt with great joy. But gladdest of all was the King, who now had his other daughter back too.

Littlecourt, though, was not at ease. Both princesses wanted him, and he wanted no one but the one he had saved first, the younger. So he often went about wondering how he could manage to get her, for he didn’t want to do the other one wrong either.

One day, as he was turning this over and over, it occurred to him that if only he had his brother King Lavring there, who was so like him that no one could tell them apart, then King Lavring could have the other princess and half the kingdom. As for himself, he thought one half was quite enough.

No sooner had he thought of it than he went outside the manor and called for King Lavring. No, nobody came. He called again, a little louder, but no, still nobody came. Then Littlecourt called a third time, with all his might, and there stood his brother.

“I told you not to call me unless you were in the direst need,” he said to Littlecourt, “and there isn’t so much as a gnat here that could hurt you.”

And he gave him such a clout that Littlecourt went rolling across the meadow.

“Shame on you for hitting me!” said Littlecourt. “First I won the one princess and half the kingdom, then the other princess and the other half, and now I was going to give you one of the princesses and half the kingdom along with me. Is that any reason to knock me about?”

When King Lavring heard that, he begged his brother’s pardon, and they were good friends again at once.

“Now, you know,” said Littlecourt, “we’re so alike that no one can tell one of us from the other. Swap clothes with me and go up to the manor, and the princesses will think it’s me coming in. Whichever of them kisses you first, you shall have, and I’ll take the other.”

For he knew the elder princess was the stronger of the two, and he could guess well enough how it would go.

King Lavring was willing at once. He swapped clothes with his brother and went into the manor. When he came into the princesses’ room, they thought it was Littlecourt, and both of them ran towards him that very instant. But the elder, who was bigger and stronger, shoved her sister aside, threw her arms round King Lavring’s neck and kissed him. So he got her, and Littlecourt got the younger princess.

And then, you may be sure, there was a wedding, and such a wedding that it was heard of and talked about across seven kingdoms.