Once upon a time there was a King who had a daughter so contrary and so twisty with words that nobody could tongue-tie her. She had an answer for everything, and the last word was always hers. So the King let it be known that whoever could leave her without an answer should have her for his wife, and half the kingdom into the bargain.

Three brothers heard of it and decided to try their luck. The two eldest went first, for they reckoned they were the cleverest. But they got nowhere with her, and were punished for their pains. Then Askeladden set off.

A little way along the road he found a willow withy, a ring of twisted willow for tying things with, and he picked it up. A bit farther on he found a piece of a broken bowl, and he picked that up too. Then he found a dead magpie, and not far off a crooked goat’s horn, and a while later another horn, the very like of the first. And just as he was crossing the fields by the King’s manor, where the muck had been spread, he found an old shoe sole, so worn out it had a hole right through it.

He took the whole lot in to the Princess.

“Good day,” said Askeladden.

“Good day,” said the Princess, and twisted where she stood.

“May I roast my magpie?” he asked, and held it up.

“I’m afraid it will burst,” said the Princess.

“Oh, never fear. I’ll tie this withy round it,” said Askeladden, and brought it out.

“The fat will run out of it,” said the Princess.

“I’ll hold this underneath,” said Askeladden, and showed her the bit of broken bowl.

“You’re a crooked one with words, you are!” said the Princess.

“No, I’m not crooked. But this is,” said Askeladden, and held up one of the goat’s horns.

“Well! I’ve never seen the like!” cried the Princess.

“Here’s the like,” said Askeladden, and brought out the other horn.

“You must be quite worn out, walking all this way just to shut me up,” said the Princess.

“No, I’m not worn out. But this is,” said Askeladden, and pulled out the shoe sole.

And then the Princess was tongue-tied. She opened her mouth and shut it again, and not a word came out. The whole hall went quiet. On his throne, the King sat forward. He had never seen the like either.

“Now you’re mine,” said Askeladden.

And so he got her, and half the kingdom into the bargain.