Once upon a time, there was a Fisherman, who lived near the Castle and fished for the King's table. One day, while he was fishing, he caught nothing; no matter how he baited and fished, and fished and baited, not a single bone hung on the hook. But as the day grew long, a head emerged from the water and said, "If I may have what your wife carries under her belt, you shall have plenty of fish." The man readily agreed, unaware that his wife was pregnant. Afterwards, he was able to catch fish daily, as much as he desired. But when he came home in the evening and told his wife how he had caught all the fish, she began to weep and lament, asking God for solace for the promise her husband had made; for she was carrying a child under her belt, she said. Soon it was heard in the Castle, that the woman was distressed, and when the King heard it, he promised to take care of the child and ensure its safety. As time passed, the woman gave birth to a boy; the King took him in and raised him as his own son until he was grown. One day, the young man asked to go fishing with his father, expressing a deep longing to do so. The King was reluctant to allow it, but in the end, the young man got permission. He joined his father, and all went well throughout the day, until they returned to land in the evening. The son had forgotten his handkerchief, which he wanted to fetch from the boat. But as soon as he got in, the boat started to drift away with him, rushing through the waters, and no matter how hard he rowed against it, it didn't help; it went and went all night, until finally he arrived at a distant, white beach. There he landed, and after walking a while, he encountered an old man with a long, white beard. "What is this place called?" asked the young man. "White Land," replied the old man, who then asked the young man where he was from and what his goal was, and the young man told him. "Well," said the man, "if you continue along this beach, you'll come across three princesses, buried up to their heads in the earth. The first one - the eldest - will call you and beg you to come and help them, and so will the second; but you should ignore both, as if you had never seen or heard them. However, you should go to the third one and do what she asks of you; it will be your fortune." When the boy came to the first princess, she called to him and begged him earnestly to come to her, but he acted as if he had not seen her; it was the same with the second one; but he went to the third one. "If you do what I tell you, you can choose whichever of us three you want," said the princess. Yes, he was willing, and so she told him that three Trolls had buried them all three in the earth there; they had previously lived in the castle he could see in the distant forest. "Now you must go into the castle and let the Trolls whip you one night for each of us," she said; "if you can endure that, you will save us." Yes, replied the boy; he would try. "When you go in," said the princess again, "there are two lions at the gate, but just go straight between them, they won't harm you. Then go straight into a small, dark room; there you must lie down. Then the Troll will come and beat you; but then you should use the bottle hanging on the wall, applying its contents where the Troll has beaten you, and you'll be good as new. Then grab the sword hanging next to the bottle, and kill the Troll." Indeed, he did as the princess instructed, he walked in between the lions, as if he couldn't see them, and straight into the tiny chamber, and he lied down there. The first night a Troll with three heads and three rods came and whipped the boy terribly; but he endured until the Troll was done, then he took the bottle and rubbed it on, and then he grabbed the sword and killed the Troll. When he came out in the morning, the princesses stood in the earth, up to their waist. The second night was similar; but then the Troll had six heads and six rods, and it whipped him even worse than the previous one; but when he came out in the morning, the princesses stood above the earth to her knees. The third night a Troll, which had nine heads and nine rods, came and beat and whipped the boy so long until he fainted; then the Troll took him and threw him against the wall, causing the jug to fall down, splashing on him, and then he was good as new again. He was not slow; he grabbed the sword and killed the Troll, and when he, the following morning, came out of the Castle, the princesses stood completely above ground. Then he chose the youngest among them to be his Queen and lived happily and well with her for a long time. But eventually, he felt the urge to go home and visit his parents. His Queen was not very keen on this; but seeing his longing, and that he insisted on going, she said to him: "Promise me this, that you will do what your father asks of you, but not what your mother asks of you," and he promised her. Then she gave him a ring, such that whoever wore it could wish for two things, whatever he would want. He wished for home, and his parents were amazed at how grand and splendid he had become. After he had been home for a few days, his mother wanted him to go to the Castle and show the King what a man he had become