Virgin Mary as Godmother.

Far, far away in a large forest, once lived a poor couple. The wife was bedridden and gave birth to a child, a beautiful daughter; but since they were poor, they did not know how they should arrange for the child's baptism. Therefore, one day the man had to go out to find godparents who could afford the offering; he walked all day visiting one after another, but although they all said they were willing to be godparents, none seemed to have the resources to offer. As he was going home in the evening, he met a beautiful lady, who was wearing magnificent clothes and who looked so lovely and kind; she offered to arrange for the child's baptism, but afterwards she wanted to keep her. The man responded that he first had to ask his wife what she wished to do. But when he came home and told her about it, the wife flatly said no. The next day the man once again went out, but still, no one wanted to be godparent if they had to provide the offering, and although he begged, it was of no use. When he was going home again in the evening, he met the beautiful lady once again, who looked so amiable, and she repeated the same offer. He told his wife what had happened to him, and she then said that if he also next day could not find godparents for the child, they might as well let the lady have her, since she seemed so kind and clever. The third day the man went out, he could find no godparents, and when he again met the lady in the evening, he promised to let her have the child if she would arrange for its baptism and Christianity. So, in the morning, she came to where the man lived, accompanied by two men, took the child and went to church with her, and there it was baptized. Then she took her home with her, and there the little girl lived with her for several years, and the foster mother was always kind and good to her. When the girl had grown to an age where she began to understand things, the foster mother prepared to go away. "You can go around in all the rooms, wherever you want," she told the girl, "just not in the three chambers I will now show you." And then she left. But the girl could not help but open one of the chamber doors a bit, and lo and behold! a star flew out. When the foster mother came back, she was angry with the foster daughter and threatened to chase her away; but the child cried and pleaded for herself, and so, in the end, she was allowed to stay. After some time, the foster mother was to go away again, and then she once again forbade the girl to enter the two chambers where she had not been. She promised to be careful; but after she had been alone for a while, pondering over what could possibly be inside the second chamber, she could not resist peeking a little bit through the door to take a look inside, and lo and behold! the moon flew out. When the foster mother returned and saw that the moon had slipped out, she was very upset and told the girl that she could not keep her anymore, she had to go. But the girl cried bitterly and begged so beautifully for herself, and so she was allowed to stay this time as well. After some time, the foster mother was to go away again, and then she seriously cautioned the girl, who was now half-grown, that she must by no means attempt to enter or look into the third chamber. But after the foster mother had been gone for a while, and the girl had been alone being bored for a long time, she thought: "Oh, how fun it would be to take a look inside the third chamber!" At first, she thought that she would not do it just the same, for the sake of the foster mother. But when she thought about it the second time, she could no longer resist, she felt that she should and must see inside the chamber; she peeked a little bit at the door, and lo and behold! the sun flew out. When the foster mother now came back, and saw that the sun had flown out, she was deeply upset, and said that the girl could no longer be allowed to stay with her. The foster daughter cried and pleaded even more beautifully than before, but it was of no use. "No, now I must punish you," the mother said — "but now you can have a choice: either you will become the most beautiful of all women and not be able to speak, or you will become the ugliest and be able to speak. But you must leave me." The girl said: "Then I would rather be beautiful." And she also became so, but from that time on she was mute. When she had left the foster mother, she wandered through a great, great forest, but no matter how much she walked, there never seemed to be an end to it. As evening was approaching, she climbed up a tall tree, which stood right above a spring, and settled there for sleep for the night. Nearby a castle lay, and from it came a girl early in the morning, who was to fetch water from the spring for the prince's tea. The maid saw the beautiful face in the spring and thought it was her own; so she threw the water bucket, ran home again and became haughty, saying: "If I'm so beautiful, then I'm surely too good to fetch water." Another one should then fetch the water, but it went the same way with her; she also came back and said because she was beautiful and good, she didn't need to fetch water for the prince. So the prince went himself, for he wanted to see what was happening. When he came to the spring, he also saw the reflection, and immediately looked up; then he was aware of the beautiful maiden who was sitting up in the tree. He enticed her down and took her home with him, and he wanted to have her as his queen for she was so beautiful. But his mother, who was still alive, objected, "but she cannot speak," she said, "and she might very well be a troll woman." But the prince was not satisfied until he got her. After they had lived together for a while, she became pregnant, and when she was to give birth, the prince placed a strong guard around her; but at her birth hour, everyone fell asleep, and when she had given birth, her foster mother came, cut the baby's little finger and smeared the queen around the mouth and the fingers with the blood, and said to her: "Now you will be as upset as I was when you had let the star out." Then she disappeared with the baby. When those who were on guard woke up, they thought the queen had eaten her own baby, and the old queen wanted to have her burned, but the prince loved her so dearly, and he finally begged her free from the punishment; but it was by the skin of her teeth. The second time the young queen was to give birth, a double guard was set as compared to the first time. But it went the same way as before, only this time the foster mother said: "Now you will be as upset as I was when you had let the moon out." The queen cried and pleaded — for when the foster mother was there, she could speak; but it mattered not. Now the old queen finally wanted to have her burned, but the prince was able to beg her free this time as well. When the queen was to give birth for the third time, a triple guard was set around her, but it all went the same way: the foster mother came while the guard was sleeping, took the baby and cut it's little finger and smeared the queen's mouth with blood; then she said the queen should be as upset as she herself had been when the sun had slipped out. Now, the prince could no longer save her in any way: she had to be burned. But just at the moment when they led her up to the pyre, they saw the foster mother, who appeared with all three children; two of them she was leading by their hands, and the third one she carried on her arm. She went over to the young queen and said: "Here are your children, now you will get them back. I am the Virgin Mary, and just as upset as you have been now, I was when you had let out the sun, the moon, and the star. Now you have suffered punishment for what you did, and from now on you will be able to speak again." How happy the queen and the prince became, everyone can easily imagine, but no one can say it. They were always happy afterwards, and from that time on the prince's mother also loved the young queen.
