The Rooster and the Hen in the Nut Forest.

Once, the Rooster and the Hen went to the Nut Forest to gather nuts; the Hen ended up with a nut shell in her throat and began to thrash about with her wings. The Rooster sought water for her; he went to the spring and said, "Dear Spring, give me water; the water I will give to my Hen, who is near death in the Nut Forest." The spring replied, "You shall not have water from me, until I receive leaves from you." So, the Rooster ran to the Linden tree: "Dear Linden, give me leaves; the leaves I will give to the spring, the spring gives me water, the water I will give to my Hen, who is near death in the Nut Forest." "You shall not receive leaves from me, until I receive red gold ribbons from you," answered the Linden. so, the Rooster ran to the Virgin Maria: "Dear Virgin Maria, give me red gold ribbons; the red gold ribbons I will give to the Linden, the Linden gives me leaves, the leaves I give to the spring, the spring gives me water, the water I will give to my Hen, who is near death in the Nut Forest." "You shall not receive red gold ribbons from me, until I receive shoes from you," answered the Virgin Maria. So, the Rooster ran to the Shoemaker: "Dear Shoemaker, give me shoes; the shoes I will give the Virgin Maria, the Virgin Maria gives me red gold ribbons, the red gold ribbons I give to the Linden, the Linden gives me leaves, the leaves I give to the spring, the spring gives me water, the water I give to my Hen, who is near death in the Nut Forest." "You shall not receive shoes from me, until I receive bristles from you," answered the Shoemaker. 

So then, the Rooster ran to the Sow: "Dear Sow, give me bristles; the bristles I give to the Shoemaker, the Shoemaker gives me shoes, the shoes I give to the Virgin Maria, the Virgin Maria gives me red gold ribbons, the red gold ribbons I give to the Linden, the Linden gives me leaves, the leaves I give to the spring, the spring gives me water, the water I give to my Hen, who is near death in the Nut Forest." "You shall not receive bristles from me, until I receive grain from you," answered the Sow. So the Rooster ran to the Farmer: "Dear Farmer, give me grain; the grain I will give the Sow, the Sow gives me bristles, the bristles I give the Shoemaker, the Shoemaker gives me shoes, the shoes I give the Virgin Maria, the Virgin Maria gives me red gold ribbons, the red gold ribbons I give to the Linden, Linden gives me leaves, the leaves I give to the spring, the spring gives me water, the water I give to my Hen, who is near death in the Nut Forest." "You shall not receive grain from me, until I receive lefse (Norwegian traditional flat bread) from you," answered the Farmer.

So, the Rooster ran to the Baker's wife: "Dear Baker's wife, give me lefse; the lefse I give the Farmer, the Farmer gives me grain, the grain I give to the Sow, the Sow gives me bristles, the bristles I give the Shoemaker, the Shoemaker gives me shoes, the shoes I give the Virgin Maria, the Virgin Maria gives me red gold ribbons, the red gold ribbons I give to the Linden, the Linden gives me leaves, the leaves I give to the spring, the spring gives me water, the water I give to my Hen, who is near death in the Nut Forest." "You shall not receive lefse from me, until I receive firewood from you," answered the Baker's wife.

And thus, the Rooster ran to the Lumberjack: "Dear Lumberjack, give me firewood; the firewood I give to the Baker's wife, the Baker's wife gives me lefse, the lefse I give to the Farmer, the Farmer gives me grain, the grain I give to the Sow, the Sow gives me bristles, the bristles I give to the Shoemaker, the Shoemaker gives me shoes, the shoes I give to the Virgin Maria, the Virgin Maria gives me red gold ribbons, the red gold ribbons I give to the Linden, the Linden gives me leaves, the leaves I give to the spring, the spring gives me water, the water I give to my Hen, who is near death in the Nut Forest." "You shall not receive firewood from me, until I receive an axe from you," answered the Lumberjack.

So, the Rooster ran to the Smith: "Dear Smith, give me an axe; the axe I give to the Lumberjack, the Lumberjack gives me firewood, the firewood I give to the Baker's wife, the Baker's wife gives me lefse, the lefse I give to the Farmer, the Farmer gives me grain, the grain I give to the Sow, the Sow gives me bristles, the bristles I give the Shoemaker, the Shoemaker gives me shoes, the shoes I give to the Virgin Maria, the Virgin Maria gives me red gold ribbons, the red gold ribbons I give to the Linden, the Linden gives me leaves, the leaves I give to the spring, the spring gives me water, water I give to my Hen, who is near death in the Nut Forest." "You won't get an axe from me, until I get coal from you," answered the Smith.

So, the Rooster ran to the Charcoal-maker: "Dear Charcoal-maker, give me coal; the coal I give to the Smith, the Smith gives me the axe, the axe I give to the Lumberjack, the Lumberjack gives me firewood, the firewood I give to the Baker's wife, the Baker's wife gives me lefse, the lefse I give to the Farmer, the Farmer gives me grain, the grain I give to the Sow, the Sow gives me bristles, the bristles I give the Shoemaker, the Shoemaker gives me shoes, the shoes I give the Virgin Maria, the Virgin Maria gives me red gold ribbons, the red gold ribbons I give to the Linden, the Linden gives me leaves, the leaves I give to the spring, the spring gives me water, the water I will give to my Hen, who is near death in the Nut Forest." The Charcoal-maker took pity on the Rooster and gave him coal. And so, the Smith got coal, the Lumberjack got an axe, the Baker's wife got firewood, the Farmer got lefse, the Sow got grain, the Shoemaker got bristles, the Virgin Maria got shoes, the Linden got red gold ribbons, the spring got leaves, and the Rooster got water. And this water he gave to his Hen, who was near death in the Nut Forest: and so, she became well again.