Soria Moria Castle, Once upon a time, there were a couple with a son named Halvor. Ever since he was a little boy, he refused to do anything and just sat around poking at the ashes. His parents sent him out to learn many things, but Halvor never stayed anywhere. Whenever he was away for a few days, he would run away from his lessons, hurry home, and sit in the hearth to dig in the ashes again. But then, a captain came along and asked Halvor if he would like to sail with him to see foreign lands. Yes, Halvor was eager for that and was ready in no time. I don't know how long they sailed, but a fierce storm eventually arose, and when it calmed, they realized they had been blown to an unfamiliar coast unknown to any of them. It was so calm that not a feather stirred, so they remained there. Halvor asked the captain if he could go ashore and look around, as he'd rather walk than lie asleep. "Do you think you can show yourself before people?" the captain said. "You don’t have anything to wear but the rags you're in." Halvor persisted, and finally, he received permission. He was supposed to return when it started to blow. So he went and found a beautiful land everywhere he went, with large plains and meadows, but he saw no people. When it started to blow, Halvor still felt he hadn’t seen enough, and he wanted to walk further to see if he could find any people. After a while, he came upon a large road, so even it would be easy to roll an egg down it. Halvor followed it, and towards evening, he spotted a large castle far away, with lights shining from every window. As he had walked the whole day and hadn't brought any provisions with him, he was very hungry. But the closer he got to the castle, the more frightened he also became. A warm fire burned in the castle, and Halvor entered the kitchen, which was more splendid than any he had ever seen; there were utensils of both gold and silver, but no people. After standing around for a while with no one coming out, he opened a door; inside sat a princess spinning on a wheel. “Oh no!” she exclaimed, “how dare Christian folks come here? But you should leave if you don’t want the troll to eat you, for here lives a troll with three heads.” “I don't care if he has four; I’d like to see the fellow,” said Halvor, “and I’m not leaving, as I haven't done anything bad; but you must give me food for I'm very hungry.” After Halvor had eaten his fill, the princess told him to try to swing the sword hanging on the wall; no, he couldn't even lift it. “Well," said the princess, "then you should take a drink from the bottle hanging next to it, as the troll does whenever he goes out to use the sword.” Halvor took a gulp, and suddenly, he could swing the sword as if it were nothing. Now, he thought the troll might come anytime. Just then, the troll came rushing in; Halvor was behind the door. “Ugh! It smells like Christian blood here!” the troll said, sticking his head through the door. “Yes, you'll soon find out,” said Halvor, and he cut off all its heads. The princess was so happy because she was saved that she both danced and sang, but then she remembered her sisters and said, “If only my sisters could be saved too!” “Where are they?” Halvor asked. She told him, one was taken by a troll in a castle six miles away, and the other by a troll nine miles beyond that. “But now,” she said, “you must help me get this carcass out.” Yes, Halvor was strong; he dragged everything away and made it clean and tidy in a jiffy. They lived well there, and the next morning he set off at dawn; he couldn't rest, walking and running all day. When he saw the castle, he was a little scared again; it was much grander than the first one. But here too, there was not a soul to see. So Halvor went into the kitchen and didn’t stop there but ventured further in. “Oh, dare Christian folks come here then?” yelled the princess. “I don't know how long it's been since I came here, but I haven't seen a Christian soul in all that time; you'd better leave, for here lives a troll with six heads.” “No, I'm not leaving,” said Halvor, “even if he has another six heads.” “He'll swallow you whole,” said the princess. But it was no use; Halvor wouldn’t leave. He wasn’t afraid of the troll, but he did want food and drink as he was hungry from his journey. Yes, he got as much as he wanted, but then the princess insisted he leave. “No,” said Halvor, “I'm not going, for I haven’t done anything wrong, and I have nothing to fear.” “He doesn’t care about that,” said the princess, “he’ll take you without any permission; but since you're not leaving, try to swing the sword the troll uses in war.” He couldn’t swing the sword; but then the princess said he should take a drink from the bottle hanging beside it, and after doing that, he could swing it. Just then, the troll came; it was so large and massive it had to turn sideways to get through the door. When he got the first head inside, he roared: “Ugh! It smells like Christian blood here!” At that moment, Halvor cut off the first head, and then all the others. The princess was so happy she didn’t know where to stand; but then she thought of her sisters and wished they, too, were saved. Halvor thought perhaps there was a way and wanted to leave immediately, but first, he had to help the princess remove the troll’s body. Then he set out the next morning. It was a long way to the castle, and he both walked and ran to get there in time. Towards evening, he saw the castle, and it was much grander than both the others. Now he wasn't the least bit afraid, but went through the kitchen and straight inside. There sat a princess who was so beautiful it was beyond words. She said the same as the others, that she hadn’t seen a Christian soul since she arrived and begged him to leave, or else the troll would swallow him alive; it had nine heads, she said. “Well, even if it has another nine, and nine more, still I won’t leave,” said Halvor, and he stood by the stove. The princess begged him to leave so the troll wouldn't eat him, but Halvor said: “Let him come whenever he wants.” So she handed him the troll's sword and asked him to take a drink from the bottle so he could swing it. Just then, the troll came with a rush; it was even larger and broader than the other two and also had to turn sideways to get through the door. “Ugh! It smells like Christian blood here,” it said. At that moment, Halvor cut off the first head, then all the others, though the last was the toughest of them all, and it was the hardest work Halvor had done, getting it off, even though he thought he would have the strength. Now all the princesses came together in the castle, and they were happier than they had ever been in their lives, and they were fond of Halvor and he of them, and he could choose whichever he liked the best; the youngest one was the most fond of him of all three. Halvor was there and was so well-behaved, he was so quiet and still; so the princess asked him what he longed for and if he wasn’t happy to be there. Yes, he liked it well enough, for they had plenty to live on, and he had a good time there, but he longed for home, as he had parents alive, and he very much wanted to see them again. They thought that could be arranged; “you can come back and forth unharmed if you follow our advice,” the princesses said. Yes, he wouldn’t do anything other than what they wanted. So they dressed him up so he looked as grand as a king’s son, and they put a ring on his finger, and it was such that he could wish himself both there and back with it; but they said he must not lose it and not mention their names, for then it would be the end of all the splendor, and he would never see them again. “If only I were at home, and home were here!” said Halvor, and as he wished, it happened: he stood outside the cottage with his parents before he knew it. It was dusk in the evening, and when they saw such a grand, handsome stranger come in, they were startled and began both to bow and curtsey. Halvor asked if he could stay there and have lodging for the night. No, he couldn’t at all; “we are not equipped for that,” they said, “we have neither this nor that such a gentleman can be satisfied with; but it’s best if he goes up to the manor; it isn’t far, he can see the chimney from here — they have plenty of everything.” Halvor wasn’t having any of that; he insisted on staying; but the people insisted he should go up to the manor, for there he could get both food and drink, whereas they didn’t even have a chair to offer him to sit on. “No,” said Halvor, “I won’t go up there until morning; let me stay here for tonight, I can sit by the fireplace.” They couldn’t argue with that, so Halvor sat by the fireplace digging in the ashes as he used to when he was at home. They talked about many things and told Halvor all sorts of stories, and then he asked if they ever had a child. “Yes, they once had a boy named Halvor; but they didn’t know where he roamed, and they didn’t know if he was dead or alive either.” “Couldn’t it be me then?” said Halvor. “I doubt it,” said the old woman, shifting herself; “that Halvor was so lazy and sluggish he never did anything, and he was so shabby that one tat would stupefy the other on him; that never could be a man like you, sir.” After a while, the old woman went to the fireplace to rake the fire, and when the glow shone on Halvor, just as when he was at home poking in the ashes, she recognized him. “Well, it’s you then, Halvor!” she said, and there was such joy for the old parents there was no end to it, and he had to tell them how he had fared, and the old woman was so happy with him she wanted to take him up to the manor right away and show him off to the girls who had always been so proud of themselves. She went ahead and Halvor followed. When she got there, she told them that Halvor had come home again, and they should see how grand he was; he looked like a prince, she said. “I doubt it,” said the girls, tossing their necks. “He’s probably the same ragged fellow he’s always been.” Just then, Halvor came in, and the girls were so flustered they ran out in just their petticoats, leaving their shirts behind by the fireplace. When they came back in, they were so ashamed they almost didn’t dare look at Halvor, whom they had always been proud and snooty towards before. “Yes, you’ve always thought you were so fine and pretty that no one could match you; but you should see the eldest princess I’ve saved,” said Halvor. “Compared to her, you look like shepherd girls, and the middle one is even prettier; but the youngest, who is my sweetheart, is more beautiful than both sun and moon. I wish they were here so you could see!” said Halvor. He hadn’t no sooner said it before they were there; but then he was so sorry, for he remembered what they had said. There was both a feast held for the princesses and celebration, but they didn’t want to stay there. “We want to visit your parents,” they said to Halvor, “and then we’ll go out to look around.” He followed them. They came to a large body of water outside the manor. Close by the water was such a lovely green hill; the princesses wanted to sit and rest a while, as they thought it was beautiful to sit and look over the water, they said. They sat there, and after a while, the youngest princess said, “I should probably groom you a little, Halvor.” Yes, Halvor laid his head in her lap, and she groomed him, and it didn’t last long before Halvor fell asleep. She then took the ring from him and placed another in its place, and then she said: “Hold on to me, as I hold on to you – and wish ourselves to Soria Moria Castle!” When Halvor awoke, he easily understood he had lost the princesses and began to cry and lament, and he was so utterly miserable they couldn’t console him at all. No matter what his parents asked of him, he wouldn’t stay, but said goodbye, claiming he wouldn’t see them again, for if he didn’t find the princesses, life wasn’t worth living. He had three hundred dollars left; he took them in his pocket and set out. After walking a while, he met a man with a fine horse; he wanted to buy it and started negotiating with the man. “Well, I wasn’t really thinking of selling it,” said the man, “but if we can agree on a price then—.” Halvor asked what he wanted for it. “Not much I’ve paid for it, and not much it’s worth; it’s a good horse to ride on, but not much for pulling, but it can always manage your food sack and you too, if you walk a bit,” said the man. In the end, they agreed on the price, Halvor put his sack on it, and then he walked some way, and some way he rode. In the evening, he came to a green hill with a large tree, which he sat by. He let the horse go and didn’t lie down to sleep but took out his food sack. When daylight came, he set off again, for he felt he couldn’t get any rest. So he walked and rode all day long through a great forest with many green spots shining beautifully afar between the trees. He had no idea where he was or where he was headed, but he didn’t take more time to rest than when the horse got a little to eat, and he himself was able to eat from his sack when he came to one of the green spots. He walked and rode and felt like the forest never ended. But the second day, as darkness fell, he saw something shining through the trees. “I hope there are people there so I can warm myself and get something to live on,” thought Halvor. When he got there, it was a little shabby cabin, and through the window, he saw an old couple inside; they were as old and gray in the head as doves, and the old woman had such a long nose she sat by the hearth and used it to poke at the embers. “Good evening!” said Halvor. “Good evening!” said the old woman. “But what business do you have coming here?” she asked. “No Christian folks have been here for over a hundred years.” Yes, Halvor told her he was heading to Soria Moria Castle and asked if she knew the way. “No,” said the old woman, “I don’t know, but the moon is coming soon, so I’ll ask him, and he probably knows, for he shines on everything.” When the moon stood bright over the treetops, the old woman went out. “You Moon! You Moon!” she cried, “can you tell me the way to Soria Moria Castle?” “No,” said the Moon, “I can’t, the last time I shone there, a cloud covered it.” “Wait a little,” said the old woman to Halvor, “the west wind is coming soon; it probably knows, for it blows and gusts in every corner.” “Oh no! Have you a horse too?” remarked the old woman as she came inside again. “Oh, let the poor creature out in the pasture, and don’t let it stand here by the door and starve! But won’t you trade it for something else?” she asked. “We have an old pair of boots you can take fifteen leagues in each step with; you shall have them for the horse, so you can reach Soria Moria Castle sooner.” Halvor was right away willing for it, and the old woman was so delighted with the horse she was ready to dance. “Now I can ride to church too,” she said. Halvor was restless and wanted to leave right away, but the old woman said there was no hurry. “Lie down on the bench and sleep a little, for we have no bed for you,” said the old woman, “I’ll keep watch for the west wind comes.” Sure enough, the west wind came roaring so hard the walls creaked. The old woman went outside. “You West Wind! You West Wind! Can you tell me the way to Soria Moria Castle? There’s someone here who must go there.” “Yes, I know it well,” said the West Wind, “I’m heading there to dry clothes for a wedding, if he’s quick on his feet, he can come with me.” Halvor went out. “You must hurry if you want to follow,” said the West Wind, and off they went far away over moors, ridges, mountains, and seashores, and Halvor could barely keep up. “I don’t have time to stay with you any longer,” said the West Wind, “because I have to break down a piece of pine forest before I get to the bleach meadow and dry the clothes; but when you walk along the ridge, you’ll come to some girls washing clothes, and then you’re not far from Soria Moria Castle.” A while later, Halvor came to the girls who stood and washed, and they asked if he had seen any sign of the West Wind; he should come there and dry clothes for the wedding. “Yes,” said Halvor, “he’s just away breaking down a piece of pine forest, he’ll be here soon,” and he then asked them the way to Soria Moria Castle. They put him on the path, and when he approached the castle, there were so many horses and people around it was teeming. But Halvor was so ragged and torn from following the West Wind through both bushes and thickets that he stayed off to the side and didn't want to go forth until the last day when they were to eat dinner. Now, as was custom, he witnessed the groom drinking from the group of girls, and the steward would drink in their honor, to both the bride and groom and knights and servants, and finally, he arrived at Halvor. He drank a toast, dropped the ring the princess had placed on his finger as he sat by the water, into the glass, and asked the steward to send the bride his greetings and to carry it to her. Immediately, the princess rose from the table. “Who has best earned one of us,” she said, “the one who has saved us, or the one sitting as the groom?” There could be no doubt about it, everyone agreed, and when Halvor heard it, he didn’t take long to remove the rags and dress up as the groom. “Yes, there’s the rightful one!” shouted the youngest princess when she saw him, and she shoved the other one out of the way and held a wedding with Halvor.