Little Aase Goose Girl.

Once upon a time, there was a King who had so many geese that he had to have a girl just to look after them. Her name was Aase, and so they called her Aase Goose Girl.

Now, there was a prince from England who was looking for a bride. Aase put herself in his way.

"Are you sitting there, little Aase?" said the prince.

"Yes, I am sitting here mending clothes and patches, I am expecting the prince from England today," said little Aase.

"You can't expect him to choose you," said the Prince.

"Well, if I will have him, I will get him," said Little Aase.

Painters were then sent to all countries and kingdoms, to paint the most beautiful princesses; the prince was to choose from among them. He liked one of them so much that he travelled to her and wanted to marry her, and he was both happy and pleased, when he had chosen her as his sweetheart. But, the prince had a stone with him, which he placed in front of his bed, and it knew everything. When the princess arrived, Aase Goose Girl told her that, if she had had any boyfriends before, or there was something she didn't want the prince to know, she must not step over the stone he had in front of his bed. "For it tells him everything about you," she said. The princess was greatly distressed; however, she decided to ask Aase, if she would take her place in bed with the prince that evening, and when he had fallen asleep, they would switch again, so that he had the real princess with him when morning came.

That's what they did.

When Aase Goose Girl came and stepped on the stone, the prince asked, "Who is getting into my bed?"

"A pure virgin," said the stone, and so they went to sleep. But then, in the middle of the night, the princess came to take Aase's place in bed.

In the morning when they were to get up, the prince asked the stone again: "Who is getting out of my bed?"

"One who has had three boyfriends," said the stone.

Hearing this, the prince, understandably, didn't want to marry her. So, he sent her home and found another sweetheart.

When he was going to court the new girl, little Aase Goose Girl put herself in his path again.

"Are you sitting there, little Aase Goose Girl?" said the prince.

"Yes, I am sitting here mending clothes and patches, because I am expecting the prince from England today," said Aase.

"Oh, you can't expect to marry him," said the prince.

"Well, if I will have him, I will surely get him," asserted Aase.

With the new princess, everything went as before. In the morning, when she left the prince's bed, the stone said she’d had six boyfriends. The prince didn't want her either and chased her away. Yet, he thought he would once again search far and wide in many lands to find a pure maiden.

Now, when he was going to meet the new chosen girl, Aase Goose Girl blocked his path again.

"Are you sitting there, little Aase Goose Girl?" asked the prince.

"Yes, I am sitting here mending clothes and patches, because I am expecting the prince from England today," said Aase.

"You certainly can't expect to marry him," said the prince.

"Oh yes, if I will have him, I will surely get him," said little Aase with confidence.

As with the previous princesses, Aase Goose Girl warned the new one about the telling stone. But the new princess, also distressed, made the same request to Aase to switch places after the prince fell asleep.

That's what they did.

When little Aase Goose Girl stepped on the stone, the prince asked, "Who is getting into my bed?"

"A pure virgin," said the stone, and they went to sleep.

In the middle of the night, the prince put a ring on Aase's finger. It was so tight that she couldn’t take it off. The prince had been suspicious of what was truly happening and wanted a way to recognize the real maiden. When the prince had fallen asleep, the princess came, drove Aase to the goose path and took her place.

In the morning, as they were getting up, the prince asked, "Who is getting out of my bed?"

"One who has had nine boyfriends," said the stone. Angry, the Prince promptly sent her away and asked the stone about the princesses, saying he didn't understand. The stone then narrated the deception, how they had fooled him and sent Aase Goose Girl in their place. The prince decided to verify this and went to Aase, who was tending her geese, to see if she also had the ring. "If she has it, it would be best to make her queen," he thought. When he got there, he saw she had wrapped a cloth around one of her fingers. He asked why she had done that. "Oh, I cut myself quite badly," said little Aase Goose Girl. He wanted to see the finger, but Aase didn't want to remove the cloth. The Prince grabbed her finger to try to uncover it, and Aase pulled it back. The cloth came off, revealing the prince's recognizable ring. So, he took her to the palace, set her up in fine clothes, and they were married. That’s how Little Aase Goose Girl ended up marrying the Prince of England, simply because she was destined to.
