Giske.

Once upon a time, there was a widower with a housekeeper named Giske. She desired to marry him and constantly nagged him to propose. However, the man eventually grew so tired of her that he didn't know how to get rid of her.

This occurred in the period between haymaking and harvest when the hemp was ripe, and they were about to break the hemp. Giske, always considering herself attractive and adept, went about breaking the hemp until she grew dizzy from the strong scent and tumbled over, falling asleep in the hemp field. While she slept, the man came with a pair of scissors and cut off her skirt. He then smeared her with tallow and pipe soot, making her look worse than the devil.

When Giske woke up and saw how ugly she'd become, she didn’t recognize herself. "Can this be me?" Giske wondered. "No, it can't be me, I've never been this hideous. It must be the devil himself."

Wanting to understand what happened, she went to her employer's door and asked, "Is your Giske home today, Sir?" 

"Oh my God, my Giske is home," the man replied, wanting to get rid of her.

"Well, then I can't be his Giske," she thought and strutted off, with the man relieved to be rid of her.

Walking some distance until she reached a large forest, she met two thieves. "I'll join their company," Giske thought, "since I'm the devil, it should be fitting to be among thieves." The thieves, however, dashed off at the sight of Giske, thinking the devil himself was after them. But their escape was in vain, for Giske with her long legs and nimble feet was right behind them before they knew it.

“If you’re out stealing, I'll join and help you," Giske said, "for I'm well-known here in the parish."

Hearing this, the thieves felt she would be good company and were no longer afraid. They were planning to steal a sheep, but didn’t know how to get one.

"That’s not a problem," said Giske, "I served a farmer in the forest for a long time; I could find the sheep house even in pitch darkness."

The thieves thought this was excellent. When they got there, Giske was to go into the sheep house and send the animals out, and the thieves would catch them. Being careful not to wake the sleeping farmer, Giske tiptoed into the sheep house. But once inside, she cried out to the thieves, "Do you want a ram or a ewe? There's plenty to choose from!"

"Shush, shush! Just choose one that's well-fed," said the thieves.

"But do you want a ram or a ewe? Do you want a ram or a ewe? There’s plenty to choose from," Giske kept shouting.

"Shush, shush!" said the thieves, "Just choose one that's well-fed, whether it's a ram or a ewe."

"Yes, but do you want a ram or a ewe? Do you want a ram or a ewe? There's plenty to choose from," Giske insisted.

"Then shut up and just choose a well-fed one, whether it's a ram or a ewe!" said the thieves.

Meanwhile, the farmer in the house woke up from the noise and came out to see what was happening. Upon seeing Giske, who appeared gruesome due to her disheveled appearance, the farmer threw her over, all the while crying, "Be careful, guys! Be careful!"

When the farmer saw the ominous figure, he got so frightened he was reluctant to get up as he assumed the devil had been in the sheep house. There was only one solution he could think of—awakening his servants and starting to read and pray, as he had heard that they could read away the devil.

The next evening, the thieves planned to steal a fat goose, with Giske leading the way. When they reached the goose house, Giske entered to send the birds out while the thieves waited outside ready to catch them.

"Do you want a goose or a gander? There's plenty to choose from!" Giske shouted once inside the goose house.

"Shush, shush! Just choose one that's heavy," the thieves responded.

"But do you want a goose or a gander? Do you want a goose or a gander? There's plenty to choose from!" Giske kept shouting.

"Shush, shush! Just choose one that's heavy, it doesn't matter if it's a goose or gander, and keep your mouth shut," they said.

During this commotion, the geese began squawking loudly, one after the other, until they were all wailing in a chorus. The farmer came out to see what was happening. The thieves dashed off as fast as they could, and Giske followed, so quick that the farmer thought it was the black devil himself; her long legs helped, and her skirt did not hinder her.

"Just wait a bit, guys!" Giske cried out. "You could've had whatever you wanted, whether it be a goose or a gander."

But they didn't have time to stop, they thought, and on the farm, they started reading and praying, both young and old, for they were sure the devil had been there.

By the evening of the third day, both the thieves and Giske were so hungry they didn't know what to do with themselves. They planned to go to the pantry of a wealthy farmer who lived on the edge of the forest to steal some food. But the thieves were too afraid to venture, so Giske entered the loft to send food down, and they waited outside to receive it.

Inside, Giske found the place full of food—meat, bacon, sausage, and pea bread. The thieves hushed her, telling her to just throw down some food and reminding her of what happened on the previous evenings. But Giske held her ground, "Do you want meat, bacon, sausage or pea bread?" she bellowed. "You can have whatever you want, there's plenty to choose from, there's plenty to choose from!"

Awakened by this racket, the farmer came out to see what was happening. The thieves fled as fast as they could, and shortly afterward, Giske, black and hideous, came bounding out. "Wait a bit, wait a bit, guys!" she called out, "You can have whatever you want, there's plenty to choose from." On seeing the grotesque figure, the farmer thought the devil was on the loose, having heard of what had happened on the previous evenings. Panicking, people from all the farms in the parish started reading and praying as they knew prayer could cast away the devil.

On Saturday evening, the thieves planned to steal a plump goat to eat on the holy day, as they were starving from not having eaten for many days. But this time they decided not to take Giske. With her constant squabble, they said, she would only create trouble.

On Sunday morning, while Giske was waiting for the thieves, she grew extremely hungry since she too hadn't eaten for three days. Hence, she went to a turnip plot and began to dig up and eat the turnips. When the plot owner—a farmer—woke up, he felt restless and decided to check on his turnips that Sunday morning