26. Paal Andrestuen

Once upon a time, there was a woman who had a deaf husband; a good-natured man, indeed. But for that very reason, she was even fonder of the boy from the other room, whom they called Paal Andrestuen. 

The servant boy working for the deaf man had a keen sense that something was going on between these two, and so he once proposed a bet to the woman. "Would you dare to bet ten Dalers, Mother, that I can make you reveal your own shame?" 

"Why yes, I dare," she said, and so they bet ten Dalers. 

One day, as the boy and the deaf man were in the barn threshing, the boy noticed that Paal Andrestuen had gone to see the woman. He didn't say a word, but a good while before lunchtime, he turned towards the barn door and shouted all of a sudden: "Yes dal!" 

"Oh, are we going in already?" said the man; he hadn't noticed anything. 

"Yes, we should, since Mother is calling," replied the boy. 

When they entered the room, the boy began to cough and splutter so that the woman could hide Paal Andrestuen. When they then entered, there was a dish of sour cream porridge on the table. 

"No, no, Mother!” the man exclaimed, "Are we having sour cream porridge today?" 

"Oh, yes you are," replied the woman, sounding grumpy and upset. 

After they had eaten and went out again, she said to Paal: "This boy is cursed, it is his fault. You must leave now, and I will come down to the meadow with some lunch for you." 

The boy was eavesdropping from the room and said, "Father, I think it's best if we go down to the field and fix the piece of fence that got blown down, as the pigs from the other house are messing up our meadow." 

"Well, I guess we should," said the man, as he did everything they told him to. 

At lunchtime, the woman walked unevenly down to the meadow with something under her apron. "No, no, Mother! I don't think you're yourself anymore," said the man; "Are we now having lunch too?" 

"Oh yes, you are," she responded, even more upset. They lived well, ate both lefse and butter, and had some schnapps. "I will go over to Paal Andrestuen with some too, Mother," said the boy. "He hasn't had any lunch, I guess." 

"Yes, do that," said the woman, who suddenly seemed happy again. On the way, the boy picked up lefse crumbs and dropped some now and then. 

To Paal Andrestuen, he said, "You'd better watch out, as our master has noticed that you're often going over to the wife; he's not fond of it, and now he's sworn that he will chop his axe into you as soon as he sees you." 

Paal grew scared and upset, and the boy returned to the man. 

"There's something wrong with Paal's plow," he said, "and he asked if you could take the axe and sort it out a bit." 

Indeed, the man went with the axe, but Paal Andrestuen did not spot him until he ran away as fast as he could. The man turned the plow over and scanned it from all sides and since he couldn't see anything wrong with it, he walked back. On the way, he picked up the lefse crumbs the boy had dropped. The woman stood for a moment and watched this, wondering what the man was gathering. 

"Oh, Father might be gathering stones," said the boy, "he noticed that Paal Andrestuen is often visiting us. The master isn't fond of it, and now he's sworn that he will stone Mother to death." 

As quick as she could, the woman sped off. 

"What is Mother running off for?" the man asked when he arrived.

"Oh, there's probably a heatwave back home," said the boy. 

The man followed her, with the woman leading and crying out, "Oh, don’t kill me, don’t kill me! I will never let Paal Andrestuen visit me again!" 

"Now I've won the ten Dalers," called out the boy.