Gudbrand on the Hill.

Once upon a time, there was a man named Gudbrand. He owned a farm that was tucked away in a hilly valley, which led people to call him Gudbrand on the Hill. He and his wife lived so harmoniously, and they were so in sync, that everything the man did was well-liked by his wife, to the point where she believed it could not be done better. No matter what he did, she was always fond of it. They had their own piece of land, and they had one hundred dollars beneath the chest in their house, and in the barn, they had two cattles.

One day, his wife said to Gudbrand, "I think we should take one of the cows to town and sell it. We are such good people that we ought to have some small change in our hands like everyone else. We can't touch the hundred dollars stored beneath the bedroom chest, and I can’t think of why we would need more than one cow. Plus, it would allow me to spend less time taking care of the other cow and devote that time to other chores." Gudbrand thought this made sense. So he immediately took one of the cows and went to town to sell it. However, when he got to town, nobody wanted to buy the cow. "Well," Gudbrand thought, "I can just return home with my cow; I know I have food and shelter for it, and going back is just as long as going forward." And so, he started to hike back home again.

But after he had walked a bit, he met a man who had a horse that he wanted to sell. Gudbrand thought it would be better to have a horse than a cow, so he traded with the man. Later in his journey, he met a man driving a fat pig in front of him, and Gudbrand thought it would be better to have a fat pig than a horse, so he traded with that man. Further along, he encountered a man with a goat, and Gudbrand thought it was better to have a goat than a pig, so he traded with that man as well. 

He traveled a long distance until he met a man who had a sheep, and Gudbrand traded the goat for the sheep, thinking it was always better to have a sheep than a goat. As he continued walking, he met a man with a goose, and he traded the sheep for the goose, thinking it was always better to have a goose than a sheep. After a long, long journey, he encountered a man with a rooster, and he traded the goose for the rooster, thinking it was always better to have a rooster than a goose. 

As the day grew late, he started feeling hungry, so he sold the rooster for twelve shillings and bought some food with that money, thinking it was always better to save one’s life than to keep a rooster, Gudbrand thought.

He continued on his journey until he reached his closest neighbor's farm. There, he stopped and went in. 

"How did things go in town?" the people asked. "Well, it was so-so," replied Gudbrand, "I can neither praise nor complain about my luck." And then he told them the entire story about what happened from beginning to end.

"I bet you received quite a welcome when you got home to your wife!” the man at the farm exclaimed. "God help you, I would not want to be in your shoes. "<
"I don't think it turned out that badly," responded Gudbrand on the Hill, "and whether it went well or poorly, I have such a thoughtful wife that she never complaints no matter what I do." "I am sure you're right, but I still find it hard to believe," the neighbor responded. "Shall we make a bet on it?" said Gudbrand on the Hill. "At home, I have one hundred dollars lying under the chest; would you dare to match it?" The neighbor accepted, and Gudbrand stayed at the farm till evening. Then, as it began to get dark, they both headed to his farm. The neighbor stayed by the door, eavesdropping as Gudbrand went inside.

"Good evening," Gudbrand said to his wife. "Good evening," she responded, "God be praised, you're finally home." Yes, he was indeed home.

His wife then asked how his trip to the city was. "Well, it was so-so," Gudbrand replied," Nothing really worth celebrating. When I got to the city, no one wanted to buy the cow. So I traded it for a horse." "Thank you so much for that," his wife said. "We are decent people, and should be able to drive to the church just like everyone else. If we can afford to keep horses, then why not own one? Settle in the horse, kids!" "Actually," Gudbrand said, "I don’t have the horse either. I traded it for a pig along the way." "Goodness, I would have done the same myself!" she cried, "Thank you so much for this! Now we will have pork in our house, and something to offer to our guests, just like everyone else. What do we need a horse for? People would just say we can’t be bothered to walk to the church anymore. Put the pig in the stable, kids!" 

"But, I don't have the pig either," said Gudbrand; "I traded it for a dairy goat a bit further along the road." "Oh no, oh no, you do everything so well!" cried the wife. "Why did I want a pig in the first place? People would have said that we're eating up everything we have. But now that I have a goat, I will get both milk and cheese, and I still get to keep the goat. Let the goat into the stable, kids!" 

"No, I don't have a goat either," said Gudbrand; "I traded the goat for a fine sheep along the way." "No, you've done everything just as I would have wanted it, just as if I had done it myself. Why did we need a goat? I had to climb hills and dales to bring it down in the evening. If I have a sheep, I can have wool and clothes in the house, and food as well. Let the sheep into the stable, kids!" 

"But I don't have the sheep either," said Gudbrand, "I traded it for a goose." "Thank you for that, and thank you so much! What would I do with a sheep? I don't have a spinning wheel or a distaff, and I don’t care about laboring to make clothes; we can always buy clothes now. Now I will have goose flesh, which I have longed for for a while, and I can stuff my pillow with down. Let the goose into the stable, kids!" 

"Actually, I do not have a goose either," Gudbrand said; "I traded it for a rooster a bit further down the road." "Thank God you managed to figure this all out!" his wife cried. "It’s as if I had made all these decisions myself, a rooster! It's just like having an eight-day clock, for every morning, the rooster crows at four and we can also get up at the right time. what are we to do with a goose? I can't cook goose meat, and I can fill my pillow with marsh grass. Let the rooster into the yard, kids!" 

"But I don't have the rooster either," said Gudbrand, "I walked a bit further, got extremely hungry, and had to sell the rooster for twelve shillings to save my life." "Oh God bless you for doing that," cried his wife, "Whatever you do, you do exactly as I would have wished for. Why would we need a rooster? We can lay around in the morning for as long as we want. Blessed be the God, as long as I have you back who manages everything so well, I don't need a rooster or a goose, or pigs or cows." 

At this point, Gudbrand opened the door. "Have I won the hundred dollars now?" he asked, and the neighbor had to confess that he had.
