Lillekort.  
Once upon a time, there were a pair of poor people; they lived in a miserable hut, where there was nothing but deep poverty, so they had neither food nor fire. But although they had almost nothing else, they had been blessed by God with children, getting one more each year. Now they were expecting another. The man was not very pleased about this; he kept grumbling and complaining, saying that he thought they had enough of those gifts from God. When the time came for the wife to give birth, the man went to the woods to gather wood because he didn't want to see the new little screamer; he said he'd hear him soon enough when he cried for food. Once the man had left, the wife gave birth to a fine baby boy, and as soon as he came into the world, he looked around the room. "Oh dear mother," he said, "give me some old clothes from my brothers and a couple of days' provisions, and I will venture out into the world to try my luck; you have enough children as it is, I see." "God protect you, my son," said the mother, "you're much too young; it won't do." But the little boy persisted, begging and pleading, until the mother had to let him have some old rags and a little food in a bundle, and then he happily and confidently set out into the world. But no sooner had he gone than the wife gave birth to another boy. He also looked around and said: "Oh dear mother, give me some old clothes from my brothers and a couple of days' provisions, and I will go out into the world to find my twin brother; you have enough children as it is." "God protect you, you are much too small, you poor thing," said the wife; "it won't do." But it was no use, the little boy begged and pleaded until he got some old rags and a bundle with food, and then he set off bravely into the world to find his twin brother. After the youngest had been walking for a while, he saw his brother a little way ahead; he called out to him, asking him to wait; "wait up," he said, "you're going along as if you were being paid for it, but you should have waited to meet your younger brother too before you set out into the world." The eldest stopped and looked back, and when the youngest caught up and explained how it was possible that they were brothers, he said further: "But now let's sit down and see what mother has given us for provisions," and so they did. After they had been walking for a bit, they came to a brook running through a green meadow, and there the youngest said that they ought to give each other names; "since we had to hurry so, we didn't have time to do it at home, we'll do it here," he said. "What do you want to be called then?" the eldest asked. "I want to be called Lillekort," replied the other; "and you, what will you be called?" "I will be called King Lavring," the eldest answered. They baptized each other then and continued onward, but once they had walked a bit, they came to a crossroads, and there they agreed to part ways and each take a different path. They did so; but no sooner had they walked a little while than they met again; they parted again and took different routes, but before long it was the same: they met again before they realized it, and it was the same the third time. They then made the agreement that they would go in opposite directions, one to the east and the other to the west. "But if you ever find yourself truly in trouble and misery," said the eldest, "call on me three times, and I will come to help you; but don't call on me unless you are in your utmost need!" "I suppose we won't see each other quickly then," said Lillekort. So they bade each other farewell, and Lillekort went east and King Lavring went west. Once Lillekort had been walking alone for a good while, he met an old, old hunched woman with only one eye. Lillekort snatched it. "Ow, ow!" cried the old woman, "where did my eye go?" "What will you give me to get your eye back?" asked Lillekort. "I will give you a sword that can defeat an entire army, no matter how large," replied the woman. "Yes, bring it," said Lillekort. The old woman then gave him the sword, and thus she got her eye back. Lillekort continued on, and after he had walked a while, he again met an old, old hunched woman with only one eye; he snatched it before she knew it. "Ow, ow! Where did my eye go?" cried the old woman. "What will you give me to get your eye back?" asked Lillekort. "I will give you a ship that can sail fresh water and salt water, mountains and deep valleys," replied the old woman. "Yes, bring it," said Lillekort. The woman gave him a very tiny ship, which was not larger than that he could fit it in his pocket; then the woman got her eye back, and they went their separate ways. After he had walked a long while, he met for the third time an old, old hunched woman with only one eye; Lillekort snatched it again, and when the old woman screamed and behaved poorly, asking where her eye had gone, Lillekort said: "What will you give me to get your eye back?" "I will give you the skill to brew one hundred casks of malt in one batch." Yes, for that skill the old woman got her eye back, and they parted ways. But after Lillekort had walked a little piece, he thought it would be worth trying the ship. So he took it out of his pocket and first put one foot in it and then the other, and no sooner had he stepped into it with one leg than the ship grew much larger, and when he had stepped in with the other, it became as big as the ships that sail the sea. Lillekort said, "Now sail fresh water and salt water, mountains and deep valleys, and don't stop until you come to the king's castle!" And immediately the ship sped off as fast as a bird in the air until it came a little below the king's estate; there it stopped. In the windows of the royal estate, they had stood and watched Lillekort come sailing; and everyone was so amazed that they ran down to see who it was soaring through the air on a ship. But while they were running down from the castle, Lillekort had stepped out of his ship and tucked it in his pocket again; for as soon as he stepped out of it, it became as tiny as when he got it from the old woman. The people from the castle saw nothing but a little ragged boy standing down by the shore. The king asked where he was from, but the boy said he didn't know; he didn't even know how he had arrived there. But he pleaded so beautifully to be allowed to work at the royal estate: if there was nothing else for him to do, he could carry wood and water for the kitchen maid, he said; and that he could do. When Lillekort came up to the royal estate, he saw that everything there was covered in black, both inside and out, from walls to roofs; he then asked the kitchen maid what that meant. "Oh, that I can tell you," replied the kitchen maid; "the princess has long been promised to three trolls, and next Thursday evening one of them will come to take her. Knight Red has promised to save her, but God knows if he can do it; and you can understand that there is sorrow and distress here." When Thursday evening came, Knight Red escorted the princess down to the shore—where she was to meet the troll—and he was supposed to stay there and protect her; but I doubt he did the troll much harm, for no sooner had the princess sat down on the shore than Knight Red climbed up into a large tree that stood there and hid himself as well as he could among the branches. The princess cried and begged him not to leave her, but Knight Red didn't care: "It's better for one to lose a life than two," said Knight Red. Meanwhile, Lillekort asked the kitchen maid so nicely if he could be allowed to go down to the shore a bit. "Oh, what do you want there?" said the kitchen maid, "you have nothing to do there." "Oh, please, let me go," said Lillekort; "I would really like to go down there and have a bit of fun with the other boys, too." "Oh well, then go," said the kitchen maid, "but let me see you don't stay there longer than when the supper stew is hung up and the roast is put on the spit; take a good load of wood back with you into the kitchen afterward." Yes, Lillekort promised that and ran down to the shore. As soon as he arrived where the princess sat, the troll came rushing so that it whooshed and roared around it: it was so large and wide that it was terrible, and it had five heads. "Fire!" screamed the troll. "Fire yourself!" said Lillekort. "Can you fight?" shouted the troll. "If I can't, I can learn," said Lillekort. So the troll struck at him with a thick iron rod he had in his hand, so the earth flew five meters into the air. "Phew!" said Lillekort, "that was something, too! Now see a blow from me!" Then he seized the sword he had gotten from the old hunched woman and struck the troll so that all five heads flew over the sand. When the princess saw that she was saved, she was so happy she didn't know what to do. She both leaped and danced. "Sleep now for a little while on my lap," she said to Lillekort, and while he lay there, she dressed him in a golden garment. But it didn't take long before Knight Red climbed down from the tree when he saw that there was no more danger. He threatened the princess until she had to promise that she would say he had saved her; for if she didn't, he would take her life. Then he took the lungs and tongue of the troll and put them in his handkerchief and led the princess back to the royal estate; and what honor they hadn't given him before, they did now. The king didn't know what to do to honor him enough, and he always sat on the king's right side at the table. Lillekort first went out to the troll ship and took a whole lot of gold and silver belts and then returned to the royal estate. When the kitchen maid saw all the gold and silver, she was quite shocked and asked, "But dear Lillekort, where did you get all this from?" for she feared that he hadn’t acquired it in a rightful manner. "Oh," replied Lillekort, "I was at home for a bit, and some of those belts had fallen off some buckets, so I took them for you." Yes, when the kitchen maid heard they were for her, she didn't inquire further about the matter; she thanked Lillekort, and everything was fine again. The second Thursday evening passed the same way: everyone was in sorrow and distress, but Knight Red said that if he could save the princess from one troll, he could certainly save her from another and escorted her down to the shore. But he didn't do the troll much harm either; for when the time came when they could expect the troll, he said just like last time: "It's better for one to lose life than two," and climbed up into the tree again. Lillekort once more pleaded with the cook for permission to go down to the shore a bit. "Oh, what do you want there!" said the kitchen maid. "Oh, please, let me go," said Lillekort, "I would really like to go down and have a bit of fun with the other boys." Yes, he was allowed to go this time, too, but first, he had to promise to be back when the roast was to be turned, and to bring a large load of wood with him. No sooner was Lillekort down by the shore than the troll came rushing so it whooshed and roared around it; it was twice as large as the previous troll and had ten heads. "Fire!" screamed the troll. "Fire yourself!" said Lillekort. "Can you fight?" shouted the troll. "If I can't, I can learn!" said Lillekort. So the troll struck at him with his iron rod—it was even larger than the one the first troll had—so the earth flew ten meters into the air. "Phew!" said Lillekort, "that was something, too! Now see a blow from me!" So he seized the sword and struck the troll so that all ten heads danced across the sand. Then the princess again said to him: "Sleep a little while on my lap," and while Lillekort lay there, she dressed him in a silver garment. As soon as Knight Red realized there was no longer any danger, he climbed down from the tree and threatened the princess until she had to promise again to say that it was he who had saved her; then he took the tongue and lungs out of the troll and put them in his handkerchief and led the princess back to the castle. Here there was joy and gladness, as one could expect, and the king didn't know at all how to act to show Ridder Rød enough honor and esteem. But Lillekort took with him a load of gold and silver belts from the troll ship. When he returned to the castle, the kitchen maid clapped her hands in amazement over where he had gotten all that gold and silver; but Lillekort replied that he had been home for a bit, and those were belts that had fallen off some buckets: he had taken them to the kitchen maid, he said. When the third Thursday evening came, it went exactly the same way as the two previous times; the whole royal estate was draped in black, and everyone was in sorrow and distress; but Ridder Rød said he didn’t think they had so much to fear; if he had saved the princess from two trolls, he could surely save her from the third as well. He escorted her down to the shore this time too; but as it approached the time when the troll was to come, he climbed up into the tree and hid himself again. The princess cried and begged him to stop, but it was no use; he stuck with his old refrain: "It's better for one to lose life than two," said Ridder Rød once more. That evening Lillekort also asked for permission to go down to the shore. "Oh, what do you want there!" replied the kitchen maid. But he pleaded so long that he finally got permission to go; but he had to promise to be back in the kitchen again when the roast was to be turned. No sooner had he reached the shore than the troll came with whooshing and roaring noises; it was much, much larger than any of the previous ones, and it had fifteen heads. "Fire!" cried the troll. "Fire yourself!" said Lillekort. "Can you fight?" screamed the troll. "If I can't, I can certainly learn," said Lillekort. "I'll teach you!" screamed the troll and struck at him with its iron rod, so the earth flew fifteen meters into the air. "Phew!" said Lillekort, "that was something, too! Now see a blow from me!" With that, he seized the sword and struck the troll so that all fifteen heads danced across the sand. Thus, the princess was saved, and she both thanked and blessed Lillekort for saving her. "Sleep now a little while on my lap," she said, and while he lay there, she dressed him in a brass garment. "But how shall we now reveal that it's you who has saved me?" said the princess. "I will tell you," Lillekort replied. "When Ridder Rød has escorted you home again and pretends to be the one who saved you, you know he is to have you and half the kingdom. But when they ask on the wedding day who you want to have pour the drinks for you, say: ‘I want the little boy in the kitchen who carries wood and water for the kitchen maid;’ as soon as I then pour, I will spill a drop on his plate, but none on yours, and then he shall become angry and strike me, and we shall continue with this three times. But the third time, you shall say: ‘Shame on you for striking my beloved! He has saved me, and him I will have!’" So Lillekort ran back to the castle just like the previous times; but first, he again went to the troll ship and took a lot of gold, silver, and other treasures, and from that gave the cook another bundle of gold and silver belts. No sooner did Knight Red see that all danger was past than he scrambled down from the tree and threatened the princess until she had to promise she would say he had saved her. Then he escorted her back to the royal estate, and if there had not been enough honor given to him before, there certainly was now: the king could think of nothing but how to honor the one who had saved his daughter from the three trolls; it was now clear that he should have both her and half the kingdom, he said. But on the wedding day, the princess asked if she could have the little boy who was in the kitchen and who carried wood and water for the kitchen maid to pour the drinks at the bridal table. "Oh what do you want with that black ragged boy here?" said Ridder Rød; but the princess said she wanted him to pour and no other, and finally, they allowed her; and then everything went just as agreed between Lillekort and the princess: he spilled a drop on Ridder Rød's plate but none on hers, and each time Ridder Rød became angry and struck him. At the first blow, the ragged garment of Lillekort, which he wore in the kitchen, fell off; at the second blow, the brass garment fell off, and at the third, the silver garment, so he stood there in the golden garment, so shining and grand that he lit up. Then the princess said, "Shame on you for striking my beloved! He has saved me, and him I will have!" Ridder Rød swore and cursed that he had saved her; but then the king said, "The one who saved my daughter surely has something to show for it." Yes, Ridder Rød immediately ran off for his handkerchief with the lungs and tongues in it, and Lillekort fetched all the gold, silver, and all the treasures he had taken out of the troll ship; then they each laid their items before the king. "Whoever has such precious things of gold and silver and gemstones," said the king, "must have killed the troll; for such things are not to be had from anyone else;" and thus Ridder Rød was thrown into the snake pit, and Lillekort was to have the princess and half the kingdom. One day the king and Lillekort went for a walk; then Lillekort asked the king if he hadn't had more children. "Yes," said the king, "I had another daughter, but the troll took her because there was no one who could save her. Now you shall have one of my daughters; but should you save the one taken by the troll too, you shall gladly have her and the other half of the kingdom as well." "I will give it a try," said Lillekort; "but I need an iron rope five hundred fathoms long, and I will need five hundred men and provisions for them for fifteen weeks; for I will be going far out to sea," he said. Yes, he could have that, but the king was afraid he didn't have a ship large enough to carry it all. "I have a ship myself," said Lillekort, and took the one he had gotten from the old woman out of his pocket. The king laughed at him, thinking it was nothing but a joke; but Lillekort just asked for what he needed, and then the king should see. They brought everything, and Lillekort asked that they first place the rope in the ship; but no one could manage to lift it, and many couldn't fit around the tiny ship altogether. So Lillekort took hold of the rope himself at one end and laid some links up in the ship, and as he threw the rope in, the ship grew larger and larger, and at last, it was so large that both the rope and the five hundred men and the provisions and Lillekort had plenty of room. "Now sail fresh water and salt water, mountains and deep valleys, and stop not until you reach where the king's daughter is," said Lillekort to the ship; and at once, it sped away so that it whistled and shrieked around it, both over land and sea. After they had sailed far, far away, the ship stopped in the middle of the sea. "Yes, now we are here," said Lillekort, "but how we get out of here is another question." Then he took the iron rope and tied one end around himself; "now I must go to the bottom," he said, "but when I tug hard on the rope and want to come up again, you all must pull as one man, or there’s no more thinking of life for you than for me," and with that he jumped into the water, so the foam stood about him. He sank and sank, and finally, he reached the bottom. There he saw a large mountain with a door on it, and he went in. When he got inside, he found the other princess; she was sewing; but when she saw Lillekort, she clasped her hands: "Oh, thank God!" she cried, "I haven't seen a Christian man since I came here." "Yes, I've come for you," said Lillekort. "Oh, you'll never get me," said the princess, "it won't do you any good to think about that; if the troll sees you, he'll take your life." "It's good you mentioned him," said Lillekort; "where is he? It could be fun to see him." Then the princess explained that the troll was out trying to find someone who could brew a hundred casks of malt in one batch; for there was to be a feast at the troll's, and nothing less would suffice. "I can do that," said Lillekort. "Yes, if only the troll weren't so quick-tempered, so I could let him know that," replied the princess; "but he is so quick to anger, I'm afraid he'll tear you to pieces the moment he comes in. But I'll try to come up with something. You can hide in the cupboard here, and we'll see how it goes." Yes, Lillekort did that, and no sooner had he crawled into the cupboard and hidden than the troll came. "Ugh! It smells like Christian blood here," said the troll. "Yes, a bird flew over the roof with Christian bones in its beak, and it dropped them down the chimney," the princess replied; "I hurried to get it away, but it must be that smell nevertheless." "Yes, it must be that," said the troll. Then the princess asked if he had found anyone who could brew a hundred casks of malt in one batch. "No, there's no one who can," said the troll. "Just a little while ago, there was someone in here who claimed they could," said the princess. "You're always so clever," replied the troll; "why did you let him go then? You knew I wanted someone like that." "Oh, I didn't let him go either," said the princess, "but you're so quick-tempered, so I hid him in the cupboard; in case you didn't find anyone, he might as well be here." "Let him come in," said the troll. When Lillekort came, the troll asked if it was true that he could brew a hundred casks of malt in one batch? "Yes," said Lillekort. "It was good I caught you," said the troll; "get started right away; but God help you if you don't brew the beer strong!" "Oh, it will have flavor," said Lillekort, and set about brewing immediately. "But I need more trolls to carry the brewing tubs," said Lillekort; "the ones I have been given can't handle anything." Yes, he got more, so many that they swarmed, and so the brewing went. When the wort was ready, they all had to taste it, of course, first the troll himself and then the others; but Lillekort had brewed the wort so strong that they fell dead as flies as they drank it. Eventually, there was no one left but an old, miserable woman lying behind the oven. "Oh, poor thing!" said Lillekort, "you must taste the wort too!" and so he went over and scraped the bottom of the brewing kettle with the ladle and gave it to her; then he was rid of all of them. As he stood there looking around, he caught sight of a large chest; Lillekort took it and filled it with gold and silver, then tied the rope around himself, the princess, and the chest, and tugged with all his might; then the crew pulled them up in good condition. When Lillekort was well up on the ship, he said, "Now sail salt water and fresh water, mountains and deep valleys, and stop not until you reach the king's estate," and immediately the ship sped away, so the yellow foam stood around it. When they at the royal estate saw the ship, they were not slow to meet it with song and play, and they welcomed Lillekort with great joy, but happiest of all was the king, who now also had his other daughter back. But now Lillekort wasn't content; for both princesses wanted him, and he wanted no one other than the one he first saved—it was the youngest. Therefore, he often thought about how he should carry it through to get her, for he didn't want to do wrong to the other either. One day while he was pondering this, it occurred to him that if only he had his brother with him, King Lavring, who was so like him that no one could tell them apart, then he could have the other princess and half the kingdom, for he felt he had enough with one half. No sooner had he thought of it, than he went outside the castle and called for King Lavring. No one came. So he called a second time and a bit louder, but still no one came. Then Lillekort called a third time with all his might, and then his brother stood there. "I told you not to call for me unless you were in your utmost need," he said to Lillekort, "and here there isn't even a mosquito that can bother you." With that, he slapped him so Lillekort rolled over the meadow. "Oh shame on you for hitting!" said Lillekort; "first I've won one princess and half the kingdom, and then the other princess and the other half of the kingdom, and now I thought I would give you one princess and half the kingdom with me, — do you think it's right to hit me like that?" When King Lavring heard that, he apologized to his brother, and they immediately became good friends and reconciled again. "Now you know," said Lillekort, "that we are so alike that no one can tell us apart; swap clothes with me and go into the castle, so the princesses think it's me coming in; the one who first kisses you, you can have, then I will take the other;" for he knew that the eldest princess was the strongest, and so he could well guess how it would go. King Lavring was immediately willing: he swapped clothes with his brother and went into the castle. When he entered the room with the princesses, they thought it was Lillekort, and both rushed toward him at once; but the eldest, who was the largest and strongest, pushed her sister aside and embraced King Lavring and kissed him; and so he got her, and Lillekort got the youngest princess. Then there might well have been a wedding, and with such grandeur that it was heard and spoken of over seven kingdoms.