The Doll in the Grass,

Once upon a time, there was a King who had twelve sons. When they grew up, he told them to venture into the world and find wives; but she should be able to spin and weave and sew a shirt in just one day, otherwise he would not accept her as his daughter-in-law. To each, he gave a horse and new armor, and they set out into the world to search for wives. However, along their journey, they said they didn't want Askeladden with them, because he was good for nothing. Unfortunate Askeladden had to stay behind, and he didn't know what to do or where to turn; he was so sad that he dismounted his horse and sat down in the grass to cry. But after sitting for a while, one of the tufts of grass began moving, and from it came a tiny something white, and as it came closer, Askeladden saw it was a charming little girl; but she was so incredibly small. She approached him and asked if he would come down and meet the doll in the grass. Of course, he agreed, and so he did.

When he got down, the doll in the grass sat on a chair; she was so beautiful and well decorated, and she asked Askeladden where he was going and what his purpose was.

He explained that there were twelve brothers of them, and the King had given them a horse and armor, and said they should travel the world and find a wife, and she should be able to spin and weave and sew a shirt in one day. "But if you can do it, and you want to be my wife, I will not travel any longer," Askeladden said to the doll in the grass. Of course, she wanted to, and she quickly spun, wove, and sewed the shirt, but it was so tiny, no longer than this —.

Now Askeladden traveled home with it; but when he appeared with it, he was apprehensive, because it was so small; nevertheless, the King said he should have her, and so Askeladden set happily off to fetch his little sweetheart. When he arrived at the doll in the grass, he wanted to lift her onto his horse; but no, she would not; she said she would sit and ride in a silver spoon, and she herself had two tiny white horses that should pull her. So they departed, he on his horse and she in the silver spoon, and both horses that pulled her, were two little white mice; but Askeladden always kept himself on the other side of the road, because he was so scared that he would ride over her, she who was so tiny. When they had traveled a bit on the road, they reached a large water; here Askeladden's horse got scared, jumped onto the other side of the road, and toppled the spoon, causing the doll in the grass to fall into the water. Askeladden was so upset, he didn't know how to rescue her; but a short while later, there came a Merman up with her, and now she was as big as any other grown woman, and even more beautiful than before. So he put her in front of him on the horse and rode home.

When Askeladden got there, all his brothers had also arrived with their sweethearts; but they were so ugly and dreadful, and they had been so horrid that they had fought their sweethearts on the road; on their heads, they had some hats that were painted with tar and soot, and it had run off the hats and down their faces, making them even uglier and more dreadful. When the brothers saw Askeladden's sweetheart, they all were jealous of him; but the King was so happy with them both, that he turned all the others away, and then Askeladden married the doll in the grass, and afterward, they both lived happily and well for a long, long time, and if they haven't died, they are still living.
