The Twelve Wild Ducks.

Once upon a time, there was a Queen out driving; it was winter, and fresh snow had just fallen. As she traveled a bit down the road, she began to have a nosebleed and had to step out of the sled. While standing by the fence, looking at the red blood on the white snow, she started thinking about how she had twelve sons and no daughter. So she said to herself, "If I had a daughter as white as snow and as red as blood, it would be the same to me whether I had my sons or not." No sooner had she said this than an old witch appeared to her. "You shall have a daughter," she said, "and she will be as white as snow and as red as blood, but then your sons will be mine; although you may keep them until the child is baptized.”

When the time came, the Queen bore a daughter, and she was as white as snow and as red as blood, just as the witch had promised, so they named her Snow-White and Rose-Red. There was great joy in the palace, and the Queen was so happy that it was beyond measure; but when she remembered what she had promised the witch, she had a silversmith make twelve silver spoons, one for each prince, and then she had him make one more, which she gave to Snow-White and Rose-Red.

Just as the princess was baptized, the princes were transformed into twelve wild ducks and flew away, and they saw no more of them; they were gone and remained gone. The princess grew up to be both big and beautiful, but she was often so mysterious and melancholic, and no one could understand what was wrong with her.

But one evening, the Queen was also very melancholy, for she likely had many strange thoughts when she thought of her sons; she said to Snow-White and Rose-Red, “Why are you so sad, my child? If something is wrong, tell me! If there is something you want, you shall have it.”

"Ah, I feel so alone," said Snow-White and Rose-Red; "everyone else has siblings, but I am all alone; that's what I grieve for."

"You did have siblings, my child," said the Queen, "I had twelve sons, who were your brothers, but I gave them all away to have you," she said, and then she told her the whole story.

When the princess heard this, she was restless; no matter how much the Queen cried and fussed, it was of no help, she insisted on going and had to go to find her brothers, for she felt she was to blame for it all; and finally, she left the palace. She walked and walked, so far out into the wide world that you wouldn't believe such a delicate maiden could venture so far.

Once, she had been walking for a long time in a large, vast forest; one day, she grew tired and sat down on a tussock, and there she fell asleep. She dreamed she walked further into the forest to a small timber hut, and there were her brothers. As soon as she awoke, she saw a well-trodden path in the green moss, and that path went deeper into the forest. She followed it, and eventually, she also found a small timber house just like she had dreamed about.

When she entered the room, there was no one inside; but there were twelve beds, twelve chairs, twelve spoons, and twelve of everything. When she saw this, she was as glad as she had not been in many years; for she could immediately see that her brothers lived there, and that they owned the beds and chairs and spoons. She started to make a fire, sweep, and tidy up the beds, cook food, and prepare and decorate everything as well as she could; and once she had cooked and prepared everything for them, she ate herself but forgot her spoon on the table and then crawled under the youngest brother's bed and lay there.

No sooner had she lain down than she heard it rustle and whine in the air, and then all twelve wild ducks came rushing in; but as soon as they crossed the threshold, they immediately turned into princes.

“Oh, how good and warm it is here!” they said; “God bless whoever has made the fire and cooked such good food for us!” and then each took his own silver spoon and was about to eat.

But when each had taken his, there was still one left, and it looked so much like the others that they couldn’t tell it apart. Then they looked at each other in wonder; “it must be our sister's spoon,” they said, “and if the spoon is here, she can't be far away either.”

“If it’s our sister’s spoon, and she is here, she must be killed, for she is the reason for all the evil we suffer,” said the eldest of the princes, and she lay under the bed listening.

“No,” said the youngest, “it would be a shame to kill her for that; she can’t help it if we suffer; if anyone is to blame, it must be our own mother.”

They began to search for her both high and low, and finally, they searched under all the beds, and when they got to the youngest prince’s bed, they found her and dragged her out.

The eldest prince wanted her to be killed again, but she cried and pleaded so sweetly: "Oh Lord God, do not kill me," she said; "I have searched for you for many years, and if I could save you, I would gladly give my life."

“If you will save us,” they said, “then you shall live; for if you wanted, you surely could.”

“Yes, just tell me how it can be done, and I will do whatever it takes,” said the princess.

“You must gather bog-cotton,” said the princes, “and you must card it and spin and weave it into fabric, and when you have done that, you shall cut and sew twelve caps, twelve shirts, and twelve cloths from it, one for each of us, and while doing this, you must neither speak nor laugh nor cry; if you can do this, we will be saved.”

“But where shall I get enough bog-cotton for so many cloths and caps and shirts?” said Snow-White and Rose-Red.

“We will show you,” said the princes, and they took her to a great, large bog, where the bog-cotton swayed in the wind and gleamed in the sun, shining like snow from afar.

Never had the princess seen so much bog-cotton before; and she immediately began picking and gathering as best and as quickly as she could, and when she returned home at night, she would card and spin yarn from the bog-cotton. This continued well for a long time; she gathered bog-cotton and carded, and all the while she cared for the princes: she cooked and made their beds; in the evenings, they would come rushing and swooping home as wild ducks, by night they were princes, but in the morning, they flew off again and were wild ducks all day.

But one day, while she was gathering bog-cotton in the moors—possibly for the last time she would go there—the young king who ruled the kingdom was out hunting, and he rode to the moor and saw her. He stopped and wondered who this beautiful maiden could be picking bog-cotton, and he asked her too, and when she didn’t answer his question, he wondered even more, and he took such a liking to her that he wanted to take her home to his castle and marry her. So he told his servants to take her and set her on his horse. Snow-White and Rose-Red wrung her hands and gestured to them and pointed to the bags she had all her work in, and when the king realized she wanted them with her, he told the servants to take and load the bags too. Once they had done this, the princess accepted her fate, for the king was both kind and handsome, and he was as gentle and friendly to her as could be.

But when they returned to the castle, and the old Queen, his stepmother, saw Snow-White and Rose-Red, she became so angry and envious of her beauty that she said to the king: “Can’t you see that the one you’ve brought with you and want to marry is a witch; she neither speaks nor laughs nor cries?”

The king paid no heed to what she said but held the wedding and married Snow-White and Rose-Red, and they lived in great joy and splendor; but she did not forget to sew the shirts even so.

Before the year was out, Snow-White and Rose-Red bore a little prince, and the old Queen became even more furious and envious because of it; and as the night came, she sneaked into Snow-White and Rose-Red’s room while she slept, took the child, and threw it into the snake pit; then she cut her finger and smeared the blood around her mouth, and went to the king.

“Well, now come and see,” she said, “what kind of woman you have taken for a queen; now she has eaten her own child.”

The king was so distraught that he was almost in tears and said, "Yes, it must be true, as I see it with my own eyes; but she will surely not do it again; for this time, I will spare her."

Before the year was over, she had another son, and with him, it went exactly like with the first. The king’s stepmother became even more malicious and envious; sneaked into the queen’s room at night while she slept, took the child and threw it into the snake pit, cut the queen's finger, smeared the blood around her mouth, and then told the king that she had eaten this child too. The king was so distraught that you can hardly believe it, and he said, "Yes, it must be true, as I see it with my own eyes; but she will surely not do it again; and I will spare her this time too."

Before the year was out, Snow-White and Rose-Red bore a daughter, and her too the old Queen took and threw into the snake pit. While the young queen slept, she cut her finger, smeared blood around her mouth, and went to the king and said, "Now you can come and see if it isn’t as I say, that she is a witch, for now she has eaten her third child too."

This brought such grief to the king that there was no end to it; for now he could spare her no longer, but had to order her to be burned alive at the stake. When the fire was blazing, and she was about to be set upon it, she gestured for them to take twelve planks and lay them around the fire, and on them, she laid the cloths and caps and shirts for her brothers, but the youngest brother’s shirt was missing the left sleeve; she had not been able to finish it. No sooner had she done this than they heard a rustling and roaring in the air, and twelve wild ducks came flying over the forest, and each took his garment in his beak and flew off with it.

"Do you see now," said the wicked Queen to the king, "now you can truly see that she is a witch, hurry and burn her before the wood burns away."

"Ah," said the king, "we have enough wood, we have the forest to take from; I will still wait a bit, for I would like to see how this ends."

At that moment, the twelve princes came riding, as handsome and well-grown as one would want to see; but the youngest prince had a duck's wing instead of his left arm.

"What is happening here?" asked the princes.

"My queen is to be burned because she is a witch and has devoured her own children," replied the king.

"She has not eaten her children," said the princes. "Speak now, sister, you have saved us, save yourself now!"

Then Snow-White and Rose-Red spoke and explained how everything had happened, that each time she had given birth, the old Queen, the king’s stepmother, sneaked into her room at night, took the child from her, cut her finger, and smeared blood around her mouth. And the princes took the king and led him to the snake pit; there lay the three children playing with snakes and toads, and you couldn't find more delightful children for the world.

The king took them and bore them away to his stepmother and asked her what punishment she thought someone should receive who could betray an innocent queen and three such blessed children.

"She should be torn apart by twelve wild horses, each taking its piece," said the old Queen.

"You have passed the judgment yourself, and you shall have it as well," said the king, and the old wicked Queen was tied between twelve wild horses, each taking its piece of her.

But Snow-White and Rose-Red took the king and her children and the twelve princes, and they traveled home to their parents and told what had happened to them, and there was great joy and happiness throughout the kingdom because the princess was saved and had also saved her twelve brothers.