In the days when our Lord and Saint Peter still walked the earth, they came to a blacksmith. He had made a bargain with the Devil: in return for being the greatest master of smithcraft for seven years, he would belong to the Devil when the time was up. Both he and the Devil had signed their names to the contract. And so the blacksmith had written in big letters over the forge door: “Here lives the Master of Masters!”

When our Lord came and saw it, he went in.

“Who are you?” he said to the blacksmith.

“Read what’s over the door,” the blacksmith answered. “But maybe you can’t read writing, so you’ll have to wait until someone comes along who can help you.”

Before our Lord could reply, a man came leading a horse and asked the blacksmith to shoe it.

“May I be allowed to shoe it?” said our Lord.

“You can try,” said the blacksmith. “You can’t do it so badly that I can’t put it right again.”

So our Lord went out and took one of the horse’s legs off, laid it on the anvil-block in the forge, and heated the shoe until it glowed. Then he sharpened hooks and grabs, set the nails true, and fixed the leg back onto the horse again, whole and sound. When he had finished that, he took off the other foreleg and did the same. And when that too was set back on, he took the hind legs—first the right, then the left—laid them on the block, made the shoes glow, sharpened hooks and grabs, set the nails, and put the legs back on the horse again.

All the while the blacksmith stood watching him. “You’re not such a bad smith after all,” he said.

“So you think?” said our Lord.

A little later the blacksmith’s mother came to the forge and asked him to come home for dinner. She was very old, horribly bent in the back and wrinkled in the face, and could scarcely shuffle along.

“Now pay close attention to what you see,” said our Lord. He took the old woman, laid her on the forge block, and forged her into a young, lovely maiden.

“I’ll say what I’ve said,” said the blacksmith. “You’re no bad smith at all. Over my door it says, ‘Here lives the Master of Masters,’ but I’ll say plainly: you learn as long as you live.” And with that he went up to the farmyard and ate his dinner.

When he had come back to the forge again, a man rode up who wanted his horse shod. “That will soon be done,” said the blacksmith. “I’ve just learned a new way to shoe a horse; it’s handy when the days are short.” And he began cutting and wrenching until he had all four legs off. “For I don’t see what good it is, fussing with one at a time,” he said. He laid the legs on the forge block, just as he had seen our Lord do, piled on plenty of coal, and had the apprentices pull hard on the bellows-lever. But it went just as one might expect: the legs burned up, and the blacksmith had to pay for the horse. That didn’t please him much. But at that very moment an old beggar-woman came walking past, and he thought, if one thing won’t work, perhaps the other will. He grabbed the old woman and laid her on the block; though she cried and begged for her life, it did no good.

“You don’t understand what’s best for you, old as you are,” said the blacksmith. “Now you’ll be a young maiden again in the blink of an eye—and I won’t even take a penny for the forging.”

But it went no better for the poor old woman than for the horse’s legs.

“That was an evil thing you did,” said our Lord.

“Oh, there aren’t many who’ll miss her,” the blacksmith replied. “But it’s a shame of the Devil: he doesn’t even keep it so that what’s written over my door is true.”

“If you could have three wishes from me,” said our Lord, “what would you wish for?”

“Test me,” said the blacksmith, “and you’ll dare find out.”

So our Lord granted him three wishes.

“Then first and foremost I wish that whoever I tell to climb up into the pear tree by the forge wall must stay sitting there until I myself tell him to come down again,” said the blacksmith. “Second, I wish that whoever I tell to sit in the armchair inside the workshop must stay sitting in it until I myself tell him to stand up again. And lastly I wish that whoever I tell to crawl into the steel-wire purse I have in my pocket must stay in there until I myself allow him to crawl out again.”

“You wished like a foolish man,” said Saint Peter. “First of all you should have wished for God’s grace and friendship.”

“I didn’t dare reach so high,” said the blacksmith.

Then our Lord and Saint Peter said farewell and went on their way.

Time passed, and when the term was up the Devil came, as the contract said, to fetch the blacksmith.

“Are you ready now?” he said, sticking his nose through the forge door.

“Oh, I really must put a head on this nail first,” the blacksmith answered. “Climb up into that pear tree meanwhile and pick yourself a pear to gnaw on—you might be both thirsty and hungry after the journey.”

The Devil thanked him for the kind offer and climbed up into the tree.

“Well, now that I think it over,” said the blacksmith, “I won’t be able to put a head on this nail for the next four years, for this is devilish iron, so hard. You can’t come down in that time, but you can sit there and rest yourself meanwhile.”

The Devil begged and pleaded as thinly as a two-skilling fool, to be allowed to come down again, but it didn’t help. At last he had to promise he would not come back before the four years were up, just as the blacksmith had said.

“Well then, you may come down,” said the blacksmith.

When that time was up, the Devil came again to fetch the blacksmith. “Now you’re ready, I suppose,” he said. “By now you should surely have put a head on that nail.”

“Oh, I’ve put a head on it all right,” the blacksmith answered, “but you’ve come a tiny bit too soon, for I haven’t sharpened the point yet. I’ve never forged such hard iron before. While I set the point on the nail, you can sit in my armchair and rest, for you must be tired, I should think.”

“Thanks for the offer,” said the Devil, and sat down in the armchair. But no sooner had he settled than the blacksmith said again that, thinking it over properly, he could not possibly sharpen the point for another four years.

The Devil first asked nicely to be let off the chair, and then he grew angry and began to threaten; but the blacksmith excused himself as best he could and said it was the iron’s fault, for it was so devilishly hard. He comforted the Devil by saying he sat so well and comfortably in the armchair, and that in four years he would be free to the very minute. There was no other way: the Devil had to promise he would not fetch the blacksmith until the four years were up. Then the blacksmith said, “Well, then you may get up again,” and the Devil hurried off as fast as he could.

Four years later the Devil came again to fetch the blacksmith.

“Now you’re finished, I know you are,” said the Devil, sticking his nose through the forge door.

“Fixed and finished,” said the blacksmith. “Now we can travel whenever you like. But listen,” he went on, “there’s one thing I’ve stood here a long time thinking I’d ask you: is it true, what they say, that the Devil can make himself as small as he wants?”

“Yes indeed, it’s true,” said the Devil.

“Oh, then you could do me the favor of crawling into this steel-wire purse and seeing whether the bottom is sound,” said the blacksmith. “I’m so afraid I’ll lose my travel money.”

“Gladly,” said the Devil. He made himself small and crawled into the purse.

But no sooner was the Devil inside than the blacksmith snapped the purse shut.

“Yes, it’s sound and tight everywhere,” said the Devil from inside.

“That may be,” said the blacksmith, “but better safe than sorry. I might as well weld the joints a little, just to be sure.” And with that he laid the purse in the forge and heated it until it glowed.

“Ow! Ow! Are you mad? Don’t you know I’m inside the purse?” cried the Devil.

“I can’t help you,” said the blacksmith. “They say in the old proverb: you must strike while the iron is hot.” And he took the great sledgehammer, laid the purse on the anvil, and hammered away with all his might.

“Ow, ow, ow!” screamed the Devil inside the purse. “Dear friend! Just let me out, and I’ll never come back again!”

“Oh, I think the joints are welded tolerably well now,” said the blacksmith. “So you can come out again.” He opened the purse, and the Devil shot off so fast he didn’t dare look back even once.

But after some time it occurred to the blacksmith that perhaps he had done wrong by making an enemy of the Devil. “For if I shouldn’t be allowed into the Kingdom of God,” he thought, “I might end up homeless, now that I’ve quarreled with the one who rules over Hell.” So he decided it was best to try to get in—either to Hell or to Heaven—sooner rather than later, so he could know how things stood with him. He took his hammer on his shoulder and set out.

After he had walked a good way he came to a crossroads, where the road to Heaven splits from the one that goes to Hell. There he caught up with a journeyman tailor who was trotting along with his pressing iron in his hand.

“Good day,” said the blacksmith. “Where are you headed?”

“To Heaven, if I can get in,” answered the tailor. “And you?”

“Oh, we won’t be traveling together far, then,” said the blacksmith. “I’ve thought I’ll try Hell first, for I have some acquaintance with the Devil from before.”

So they said farewell and went each his own way. But the blacksmith was a strong, broad man and walked much faster than the tailor, and it wasn’t long before he stood at the gate of Hell. He had the guard announce him and say there was someone outside who would like a word with the Devil.

“Go out and ask who it is,” said the Devil to the guard, and he did so.

“Give the Devil my greetings and tell him it’s the blacksmith—the one with the purse, you know,” the man replied. “And ask him kindly to let me in at once, for first I forged today until dinner, and since then I’ve walked a long way.”

When the Devil received that message, he ordered the guard to lock all nine locks on Hell’s gate again. “And put a padlock on as well,” said the Devil, “for if he gets in, he’ll make a wreck of all Hell.”

“There’s no salvation to be had here,” the blacksmith muttered to himself when he heard them barring the gate even more tightly. “Then I’ll have to try Heaven.” And he turned about and went back until he reached the crossroads again; there he took the road the tailor had gone.

Now he was angry at the long walk he had taken back and forth for nothing, so he strode as hard as he could and reached Heaven’s gate just as Saint Peter was cracking it open a little—just enough for the thin tailor to slip inside. The blacksmith was still six or seven steps from the gate. “Here it’s best to hurry,” he thought. He grabbed his sledgehammer and threw it into the crack of the door at the very moment the tailor slid in; but if he didn’t get in through that opening, I don’t know where he ended up.