Once upon a time, there was a farmer who had three sons. He was poor, old, and weak, and his sons refused to take on any work. The farm had a large, fine forest, which the father wanted the boys to cut down so they could pay off some of the debt. Eventually, he managed to get them to do it, and the eldest was to start first. When he went into the forest and began chopping at an old bearded spruce, a big, hefty troll appeared. "If you chop in my forest, I'll kill you!" said the troll. The boy, upon hearing this, threw down the axe and ran back home as fast as he could. Out of breath, he told what had happened, but the father called him a coward; he hadn't let trolls scare him away when he was young, he claimed. 

The next day, the second son went out, and things went exactly the same way. As soon as he'd made a few cuts in the spruce, the troll appeared and said, "If you chop in my forest, I'll kill you!" The boy hardly dared to look at the troll, threw his axe, and ran like his brother, maybe even faster. When he got home, the father was angry and said that trolls had never scared him off when he was young. 

On the third day, Askeladden wanted to try. "Yeah, right, you'll manage it, you who have never stepped foot outside the door!" said the eldest ones. Askeladden didn't reply to that but merely asked for a good packed lunch. The mother had no butter, so she cooked up a bit of something for him, packed it in a bag, and he set off. After he'd chopped for a little while, the troll came to him, too, and said, "If you chop in my forest, I'll kill you!" But the boy wasn't slow; he darted into the woods after the cheese and squeezed it so that the whey squirted out. "If you don't keep quiet," he yelled at the troll, "I'll squeeze you like I squeeze the water out of this white stone!" "No, dear, spare me," said the troll, "I'll help you chop." On that condition, the boy spared him, and the troll was good at chopping, so they felled and limbed many piles that day. As evening came, the troll said, "Now you can come home with me, it's closer to me than to you." So, the boy went along, and when they reached the troll's home, he was supposed to build up the fire on the hearth while the boy fetched water for the porridge pot. But there were two iron buckets so big and heavy he couldn't even lift them from the spot. So the boy said, "There's no point in carrying these thimbles; I'll just fetch the whole well." "No, dear me," said the troll, "I can't lose my well; you build up the fire, and I'll get the water."

When he returned with the water, they cooked up a hearty porridge pot. "It doesn't matter," said the boy, "if you like, we can have an eating contest." "Oh yes!" said the troll, thinking he would always come out on top. So they sat down at the table, but the boy secretly tied the food bag in front of him and spooned more into the bag than into his own mouth. When the bag was full, he took his pocket knife and cut a slit in the bag. The troll watched him but didn't say anything. After they'd eaten a long while, the troll put down his spoon and said, "No, I can't eat anymore." "You must eat!" replied the boy, "I'm not even half-full yet. Do as I did, cut a hole in your belly, and you'll eat as much as you want." "But doesn't that hurt horribly?" asked the troll. "Oh, nothing to speak of," answered the boy. So the troll did as the boy said, and you can imagine he lost his life; but the boy took all the silver and gold he found in the mountain and went home with it. With that, he could always pay off some of the debt.