Once upon a time, the charcoal burner felt sorry for the rooster and gave him some coal. The blacksmith then got coal, the woodcutter received an axe, the baker woman got firewood, the carpenter received lefses, the piglet got grain, the shoemaker brushes, the Virgin Mary shoes, the linden tree red gold ribbons, the spring leaves, and the rooster water, which he gave to the hen, Tuppen, who was lying on the brink of death in the nut forest: thus she recovered.

Why the Bear has a Stump Tail.  
Once, the Bear met the Fox, who was sneaking around with a bundle of fish he had stolen. “Where did you get those from?” asked the Bear. “I’ve been out fishing, Sir Bear!” replied the Fox. The Bear then wanted to learn how to fish too, and asked the Fox how he should go about it. “It’s a simple art for you,” answered the Fox, “and it’s soon learned; you just have to go out onto the ice, chop a hole, and stick your tail in; and you must keep it there for quite a while. You shouldn’t worry even if it stings a bit: that’s when the fish are biting; the longer you hold it there, the more fish you’ll catch. And when the time comes, yank it up hard!” So, the Bear did as the Fox had said and kept his tail in the hole for a long, long time until it had frozen firmly. Then he yanked it hard — and it snapped off, and now he goes stub-tailed to this very day.

The Fox Tricks the Bear Out of the Christmas Meal.  
Once, the Bear and the Fox bought a tub of butter together; they planned to use it for Christmas, so they hid it under a thick spruce bush. Then they went a little distance away and lay down in a sunny spot to sleep. After a while, the Fox got up and exclaimed, "Yes!" — dashed straight over to the butter tub, and devoured a good third of it. When he returned and the Bear asked where he had been, since he looked so greasy around the mouth, the Fox said: "Would you believe I was invited to a christening?" "Oh really! What was the baby named?" asked the Bear. "Started-on," said the Fox. With that, they lay down to sleep again. Soon, the Fox jumped up again and shouted: “Yes!” and dashed off to the butter tub. This time, he ate another good chunk. When he came back and the Bear again asked where he had been, he answered: “Oh, wasn't I just invited to another christening, don’t you think?” “What was the baby named this time?” asked the Bear. “Half-Eaten,” replied the Fox.